ONONDAGA NATION _ Irving Powless Jr.
, the 69-year-old chief of the Onondaga Indian Nation, longs to see the day when his people enjoy economic stability and independence _ and not from the revenues of a casino or a bingo hall.
Rather, Powless, whose tribe opposes gambling, hopes that a settlement with the state of New York over ancient land claims will bring his brethren the assets they desperately need to upgrade their 7,300-acre reservation south of Syracuse.
``We have lived in this area for 1,200 years,'' said Powless, a robust man who recalls with pride when, a generation ago, he competed against football great Jim Brown in a lacrosse match and knocked the powerful All-American and Hall of Fame fullback off his feet.
``There was fresh water, fresh air, no pollution''.
Today, the Onondagas are neither financially wealthy nor land rich.
Pollution, from a dump and from a petroleum spill at a cigarette shop, has fouled the Indian territory.
``We're considered poor,'' Powless said.
``How do you measure that?...
How many homeless people do you have in your city?
We have zero''.
Members of the tribe have a right to live on the reservation, but many survive on low-wage jobs and welfare _ the consequence of a people ``living in abject poverty'' for 200 years, according to Robert Coulter, a lawyer with the Indian Law Resource Center, a nonprofit group that is helping the Onondagas on their proposed claim.
The Onondagas haven't yet gone to court to stake their land claim, but the nation is building a case against the state of New York that would follow suits filed by other Iroquois nations _ the Cayuga, Mohawk, Oneida and Seneca _ with the federal government as co-plaintiff.
Several Indian law and history experts believe the Onondaga case would be very strong.
The tribe has identified a 10-mile-square section of Onondaga County as an area to which it lays claim.
The land includes a mile surrounding Onondaga Lake and most of Syracuse, a city of 163,000 in upstate New York.
That represents a fraction of the acreage that the Onondagas controlled more than two centuries ago.
Powless said he has been hearing about land claims since he was a boy growing up on the reservation, where his father, Irving Powless Sr.
, also served as chief.
Powless views the reservation as an island representing the hundreds of thousands of acres wrongfully taken by and poorly used by ``the Europeans'' who obtained Indian properties illegally.
He smiles as he talks about his boyhood on the Onondaga territory, where he learned to fish, hunt and play sports.
One of the top three officers among the 14 chiefs of the Onondagas, Powless has proven to have a tough side to him.
And some Onondaga members feel Powless is too powerful.
``No one can have anything unless you go through him,'' says Alice Thompson, 64, who lives on the reservation.
Thompson, according to Powless, was part of an insurgent group that wanted to overthrow his government.
A land-claim settlement would be a way to ease some of the tensions that remain.
It could pump up the tribal government's popularity, pay for toxic cleanups and help the Onondaga government afford better educational, cultural and social programs.
Powless said the Onondaga people want to work with the community outside the reservation to improve the economy of the region, perhaps creating tourism destinations that might include Indian culture, or setting up a free-trade zone at unused manufacturing sites.
The Onondagas say they don't intend to threaten eviction of property owners in whatever suit they file, unlike the Cayugas and Oneidas.
But they have not ruled out governmental and commercial property holders as targets for eviction.
``Maybe they should be subjected to some of the things we were subjected to _ such as taking your land away from you for 200 years,'' Powless said .
PHOENIX _ Victoria Molina wants strangers to stop complaining about her having babies on taxpayer's money and government workers to stop asking how she spends that money.
Most of all, she wants her children to stop complaining because there's only enough money for one meal a day.
Now the welfare mother knows how to make it all stop.
And it's going to start with a screwdriver.
Molina, along with seven other welfare mothers from the Pascua Yaqui Tribe in Tucson, have learned to use that screwdriver to tear apart a computer and put it back together.
It's the mothers' first and frightening step in learning to compete for wealth in a system that often treats them with insult and indifference.
It's also the first step in a welfare reform program designed by the Pascua Yaqui Tribe, the first of Arizona's 21 Native American communities to take charge of its own program to get parents from welfare to work.
White Mountain Apache community's welfare program started in April.
Tribes throughout the state and country are just beginning to take advantage of the power and money granted them by the 1996 federal welfare law to customize their own reform programs.
Most of the 16 Indian-run programs across the nation are designed to emphasize education and soften the punitive nature of many state programs.
And most are in need of more money.
The Pascua Yaqui Tribe needs computer technicians, so they're training their own.
By October, some welfare parents in the Salt River Pima-Maricopa community will be attending desk top publishing or nursing courses.
On the remote Navajo Nation, where jobs and training are scarce, welfare parents could soon be asked to tend sheep or chop wood for their elders in exchange for their benefits.
``Our nation, philosophically, certainly supports the ideals of personal responsibility and self sufficiency,'' said Virgil Pablo, a director with the Navajo Nation's Social Services Department.
``With the remoteness on the reservation and limited access to development in remote and isolated areas, we're in the best position to say what is appropriate for us,'' Pablo said.
Jorge Garcia, who designed the Yaqui program, calls the emphasis on education the basic philosophical difference between the Yaquis' program and the state-run program.
``We want to prepare parents to be a successful provider, not someone who lives on the fringes,'' said Garcia, who knows Molina and many of the mothers in her computer class know how to get a job and have supplemented their welfare income waitressing and filing.
``These people have always been on the fringes''.
Now, Garcia said, they want a career.
But if they are to succeed, Arizona Indian leaders told a U.S.
Congressional hearing Friday that Native American governments need more flexibility, more independence and money, and a sincere effort by counties and the state to create jobs in rural areas.
Indian leaders were invited to report their welfare reform progress and problems to Arizona's Congressman J.D.
Hayworth and Rep.
Clay Shaw of Florida, chairman of the U.S.
House Ways and Means Subcommittee on Human Resources, at a hearing in the state capital.
Most Arizona tribes are grappling with the opportunity to cushion their members from the harsher blows of the state's welfare reform and to refocus their own bureaucracies to aid their neediest families.
``It's a unique opportunity the state can't begin to do because they have thousands of people,'' said Lillia Castaneda, who is in charge of putting the Salt River community's 250 to 400 adults now receiving benefits to work.
``They're not numbers to us, they're people.
They're families''.
But it won't work unless scattered tribal bureaucracies learn to work with each other and with numerous state and federal agencies distributing bits and pieces of welfare funds, said Eddie Brown, Associate Dean at the Center for American Indian Studies at Washington University in St.
Louis, Mo.
He also isn't sure that the federal government is ready to pay the price of putting people to work on the nation's poorest reservations.
Native Americans living on reservations that maintain 50 percent or more unemployment are exempt from the national five-year family limit on welfare benefits.
That limit is pressuring states to move quickly with reform.
Nine Arizona tribes are exempt.
That exemption is a blessing and a curse, said Brown.
``It's a blessing because it understands that living on a reservation is not a normal situation,'' said Brown.
Expensive problems that keep people out of work, such as drug and alcohol addiction, domestic violence, poor education and teen births, and lack of jobs, are more prevelent in Indian communities, he noted.
It's a curse, he contends, because by dropping the five-year limit, the federal government all but admitted it doesn't want to pay for solving those complicated problems.
The mothers in the Pascua Yaqui computer class, among 50 parents who are in jobs or training through the tribe's welfare program, are the cream of the welfare population, young, smart, articulate and easily motivated, said Garcia, Social Service director.
He knows many parents will need more time and cost more money to prepare for work, some are older with more children and less education and more behavioral health and medical problems.
Right now, Garcia said, the community has services to help these families, but some programs, such as childcare, already have waiting lists.
There is little money and staff to help find families who simply drop off of the welfare roles, perhaps because of drug, alcohol or domestic abuse problems _ families Garcia is unwilling to let go.
As Indian communities across the nation struggle with short funds and a long list of problems, they are watching the Navajo Nation's legal battle with the federal government.
Despite the power and money granted to tribes, they still remain dependent on state-run offices to determine eligibility and distribute cash benefits for their members.
The Navajo Nation wants a block grant that will give it state-like authority and funding to take over and streamline the entire welfare program, including eligibility and distribution of cash benefits.
It wants to avoid entering into agreements with the three different states its sprawling reservation covers and avoid working with three different federal regional offices.
While the Navajos continue their legal struggle, the Yaqui Tribe is implementing a gentler program than the massive one run by the state, where welfare roles have been slashed nearly in half in a little more than two years.
The Yaqui communities, where unemployment is 30 percent, are still bound by the five-year welfare limit, but they have eliminated the state-imposed 2-year welfare limit for adults and will still provide benefits to children born while parents are on welfare.
While the state program emphasizes quick job placement, the Yaquis are spending more time and money on education.
The tribe has 350 welfare families, or about 10 percent of its membership, some of whom live in in Scottsdale and Guadalupe.
This tiny, small-town program can provide face to face encouragement.
Molina and her other classmates only agreed to commit to the two-year computer course after people they knew knocked on their doors, tapped them on the shoulder, gave them a little push and took them by the hand to prove to them they could compete.
``Jorge (Garcia) came to my house,'' said Molina.
``I was cleaning.
I told him, `I'm not even dressed'.
He said, `Just go like you are'.
'' Garcia drove the nervous Molina to the tribal offices to interview for the program.
``I was scared,'' Molina said.
``I've just been having kids and staying home and didn't feel I had the knowledge to learn anything''.
Molina's classmates and teacher said she's now the first to volunteer to wrestle the insides of a computer she was once afraid to touch.
But it's Molina's children who keep her coming every day.
She renewed her friendship with her distant 13-year-old daughter with conversations about computers.
``They're telling everybody `My mom's in computer class.
My mom's building computers'.
'' &QL;
SYRACUSE, N.Y.
(AP) - New York acted honorably in acquiring Cayuga Indian lands two centuries ago and even took steps to protect the Iroquois tribe, a Canadian anthropologist testified Wednesday.
After two weeks of listening to how New York officials lied, bribed and cheated the Cayugas out of their 64,027-acre reservation, U.S.
District Judge Neal McCurn heard a different historical perspective from the state's first witness, Alexander von Gernet.
McCurn previously ruled that New York illegally acquired the Cayugas reservation land in 1795 and 1807 by purchasing it from the tribe in violation of the 1790 Indian Trade and Intercourse Act, which required Congressional approval for all Indian land transactions.
Following a monthlong trial, a federal court jury in February awarded the Cayugas $36.9 million for their lost ancestral lands.
The judge is now weighing historical and economic factors to decide whether the jury's award should be increased.
It is important to look at the pre-Revolutionary War years to understand New York's behavior dealing with Native Americans after that time, said von Gernet, a Native American expert from the University of Toronto.
It was long-standing policy that New York assumed authority over Indian land transactions within its borders, von Gernet said.
Historical documents show that as early as 1684, the colonial governor was required to approve any land deals with Indian tribes, he said.
That policy was carried forward in other treaties, laws and proclamations enacted over the next century, von Gernet testified.
It was a policy also included in the state constitution, he said.
''Congress was a newfangled institution.
Colonial New York had a longrunning relationship with the tribes,'' von Gernet said.
''The idea of dealing firsthand with the Iroquois had a long history in New York.
It was not one that emerged after the Revolutionary War''.
The Cayugas fought on the British side in the Revolutionary War and there was widespread sentiment in the fledgling federal government and among New York lawmakers to treat the tribe as a conquered people and make them wards of the state, von Gernet said.
However, then Gov.
George Clinton ignored the warnings and instead decided to broker a treaty with them, von Gernet testified.
Although the state clearly came out the winner by gaining ownership of Indian lands, the treaty also ensured reservation land would be set aside for the Cayugas and protected them from unscrupulous individuals who were striking private deals to buy their land, he said.
Von Gernet also testified: -That it was the Cayugas who tried to dispose of their land for 22 years before the 1795 sales and first approached the state about buying their reservation land.
-That the Iroquois Grand Council had dissolved during the Revolutionary War, leaving the Cayugas and other tribes to each follow its own course.
The Cayugas' witnesses have testified that in agreeing to the 1795 treaty, New York knowingly ignored Iroquois tradition, which required the Grand Council's consensus to make the treaty binding.
Additionally, von Gernet said, following the war, the Cayugas split into factions led by local chiefs who earned their position through achievement as opposed to inheriting them.
''There was considerable confusion about who was empowered in diplomatic discourse,'' von Gernet told McCurn.
He said the majority faction led by Fish Carrier moved to Buffalo Creek in western New York and tried to sell off the Cayugas lands to private individuals in deals that were determined illegal by state lawmakers.
The minority faction, led by Steel Trap, returned to the Cayuga Lake area, where faced with an onslaught of settlers, it eventually worked out the 1789 lease giving all the tribe's lands to New York except for the 64,000-acre reservation.
BERNALILLO, N.M.
_ With muscular yet elegant curves, the Rio Grande winds its way through the Santa Ana Pueblo reservation.
Stand along its yucca- and cactus-sprinkled shores and face north from the sacred Indian grounds where the Spanish explorer Coronado once trekked, and the Sandia Mountains seem to hang like gods in the sky to the east.
Look just to the west, and the only thing hanging in the sky is a giant neon star bearing the words ``Star Casino''.
Next to the casino, little white golf carts zip over the reservation's 27-hole championship course.
And just beyond that, construction is under way on an $80 million hotel, a spa and second golf course.
After using casino gambling, over the last several years, to help reverse their fortunes, Native-American tribes like this one are beginning to build entire leisure industries on their reservations.
But as the easy-money aura of vacation resorts, gambling, golf, and shopping spreads across the land that these people have for generations cherished and protected from outside intrusion, concern is growing among tribal members that their religion, culture and sovereignty are being pushed aside.
``It's like a leisure virus,'' said Jose Lucero, a member of the Santa Clara Pueblo tribe located about 60 miles north of here.
His tribe is divided over whether they, too, should develop a casino resort.
``We're trading our souls for money,'' he said.
``Some tribe members say `Hey, it's OK.
It's glamorous'.
But that's not what we are supposed to be.
We are supposed to be stewards of this land.
And we're not very good stewards now, allowing all of this stuff to take over''.
With the desperately needed jobs and money that casinos have brought to reservations, few people in the tribes have been publicly critical of casino gambling on their reservations.
But a once-faint drumbeat of disdain is growing louder.
Critics worry that tourists will trample across what they consider to be religious ground, that the business partnerships that the tribes are forming are increasingly being operated by outside professionals and managers.
``Our religious leaders are more or less opposed to the casino and all these companies moving in here,'' said Otis Leon, a member of the tribal council that governs the Santa Ana tribe.
But the medicine men and other protectors of the tribe's religion and culture, he added, ``are getting pushed aside in a way''.
Leon, who voted in favor of the casino development, now expresses mixed emotions.
``Things seemed OK at first,'' he said.
``But then more of the Las Vegas types started moving in''.
Despite such concerns, it is difficult to argue against what appears to be progress.
Of the 22 tribes across New Mexico, 11 now operate casinos, and it is estimated that they take in more than $350 million a year in gambling revenues.
And although there is still poverty on the reservations, jobs are plentiful, recreation centers and libraries have been built, and major investments are being made to augment the success of gambling.
Several tribes are expanding their casinos and planning hotels and vacation resorts, and the tribe that is leading the way is the Santa Ana Pueblo.
Two weeks ago, the tribe announced a partnership with the Hyatt Hotels Corp.
to build what is being billed as ``New Mexico's first major golf and spa resort''.
The 350-room resort hotel will occupy a picturesque section of the 61,000-acre reservation, which is located 15 miles north of Albuquerque.
The tribe will own the resort and Hyatt will manage it.
Additionally, the tribe is doubling the size of its adobe-style Star Casino and adding a Las Vegas-style theater.
A retail shopping center is proposed for a nearby section of the reservation.
Thanks to the profit from its six-year-old casino, the Santa Ana Pueblo tribe is operating a gourmet restaurant on the reservation, next door to its golf course and luxurious clubhouse.
This year, the tribe will host major golf tournaments, including the U.S.
Women's Amateur Public Links Championship and the PGA Western Club Championship.
nn As the tribal members who are leading the development boom see it, they are doing more than investing the casino's profits to increase economic opportunities.
With pending lawsuits and other initiatives that could shut down their casinos or lead to heavy taxes on their revenues, they say they are creating an industry that can survive even if the casinos do not.
``There are so many attacks on Indian casinos,'' said Roy Montoya, who as chief administrator of the 690-member tribe is in charge of all business development.
``What the new resort represents is another step toward self-sufficiency''.
Within the tribe, where most decisions are made by councils comprised of men, the progression from subsistence agriculture to private business has created two camps.
The traditionalists are leery of opening their boundaries to outside interests, and the business leaders like Montoya are pushing to expand.
As the profits from gambling began to add up, ``we considered two approaches,'' Montoya said during an interview in his plain but comfortable office on the reservation.
``Some people said stash the money.
Don't do anything with it.
But we chose to put these different ventures in place''.
The culture and religion, Montoya says, will be strengthened by the economic growth.
``Our culture and religion was very strong when we got our subsistence from farming right here on the reservation,'' he said.
``Then when the economy started changing and Dad had to go off the reservation to work things got weak.
But with jobs on the reservation now you have more time to spend with your family and in 15 to 20 years the religion and culture will become stronger again''.
The business-oriented tribal members seem to be winning.
When the tribal council was discussing the proposed hotel, some members bristled at the notion of building the resort just a half mile from ``The Snake Head,'' one of the reservation's many ancient religious sites.
``But the business types said they needed that site next to the river, overlooking the mountains,'' said Leon, whose grandfather held the revered religious title of medicine man.
The business interests prevailed.
As a result, Leon lamented: ``The religious people are upset with us.
They worry that the public will wander over the reservation''.
One planned aspect of the Hyatt resort that might appease the religious leaders is a small museum with exhibits depicting the tribe's history.
Such museums are becoming a common element in casino and resort developments on reservations.
&QL; Two weeks ago at the Taos Pueblo reservation, located 70 miles north of Santa Fe, tribal leaders two weeks ago approved a plan to buy a nearby hotel and meeting center and move the tribe's existing casino to the site, which would become a part of the tribe's reservation.
But not everyone on the reservation is happy about the growth.
Jerome Marcus, a 38-year-old member of the tribe and former security officer at the casino, said that as the casino has prospered he has witnessed a slow deterioration of tribal values and customs.
``I've noticed a complete lack of participation in ceremonies and understanding by our people, especially with diversions like the casino,'' he said.
Still, the benefits from all of the development are evident in the opportunities that have been created.
One recent afternoon at the Isleta Pueblo reservation, 10 miles south of Albuquerque, Aaron Dailey, a 16-year-old tribal member, was busy washing golf carts at the lush golf course just across Highway 47 from the tribe's casino.
Although he has been playing golf less than three years, Aaron already carries a 10 handicap _ better than most golfers will ever play _ and the golf professionals operating the course have high hopes for him.
``The tribe is trusting us to come in and operate their business enterprises and train their people,'' said Brent Townsley, a teaching professional at the course.
``But our goal is to see someone like Aaron take this course over and become the head pro''.
Nevertheless, the phalanx of corporate interests, lawyers, accountants, casino managers and investment advisers who swirl around the reservation is unnerving to some.
``They're taking a lot of the control of the economic development on the reservation out of the hands of the tribe itself,'' said Tim Giago, a syndicated columnist and member of South Dakota's Oglala Lakota tribe.
``I'm amazed that many of the tribes have turned into what they've deplored all their lives.
They're bureaucracies and they're being run by attorneys and accountants _ white attorneys and accountants''.
But if appearances count for anything, Roy Montoya appears to be in control at Santa Ana.
One day recently, he walked into a closed-door meeting of casino executives because he wanted to have a word with the casino's general manager, a Las Vegas transplant.
Minutes later, he was at the reservation's planning offices, interrupting another meeting of architects and developers who were huddled around a conference table.
When Montoya entered, they all popped to their feet, smiling broadly.
``We own everything 100 percent,'' Montoya said.
``All of these people are on contract, just like out in the rest of the world''.
Montoya oversees a staff of more than 400 employees, and in two years, when current development projects are complete, that number is projected to reach 700 _ more employees than tribal members.
``When I started this job in '84 I had nine employees and I was just called Roy,'' said the 58-year-old Montoya.
``Now people call me sir.
But I'm still Roy.
I get uncomfortable with sir.''
&UR; NEW AMERICA NEWS SERVICE &QC; &UR; (Distributed by New York Times Special Features) &QC; &QL; &UR; -0- &QL; &UR; (To publish this article, it must be purchased _ the rate is not prohibitive _ from New York Times Syndicate sales representative CONNIE WHITE in Kansas City at 1-800-444-0267 or 816-822-8448; fax: 816-822-1444).
&QL; &UR; (She also has information on how to subscribe to the New America News Service, a weekly diversity package of stories by and about ethnic minorities, gays, women and disabled Americans). &QL;
SOUTHAMPTON, N.Y.
_ The road leading into the Shinnecock Indian reservation is not a welcoming one: The sign marking the way reads, ``Trespassers will be arrested''.
Some uninvited people _ drug dealers and government workers _ have been reportedly fired upon after crossing onto tribal lands.
Tourists are simply asked to leave.
The Indians are an insular lot.
The world outside their 800-acre reservation here on the Shinnecock Peninsula knows little about them, and for 350 years, that's the way they have preferred it.
Their dealings with society, they say, have never been good.
``It seems every time we've dealt with the white man, we've come out the worse for it,'' said Harriet Gumbs, a 79-year-old elder and a tribal historian.
The reservation is a postage stamp of marshland swamped by poverty and unemployment.
For years, the Indians watched as land that was once theirs was transformed into housing subdivisions.
Although they complained, there were few sympathetic ears at the local courthouse and Town Hall.
After all, they had signed treaties and land-swap agreements, officials say.
``They built on our ancestors' bones, and we never really did anything to stop it,'' said Elizabeth Haile, 69, a member of the Thunderbird clan who watched over the years as houses and other buildings sprouted up around the reservation.
``That's changing with the young people''.
East End power brokers on Long Island have taken notice as this new breed of Shinnecock have lain in front of bulldozers, marched on Town Hall and protested on the steps of the state Capitol in Albany to stop the development of 62 acres of virgin woodland to the north of the Montauk Highway, the road that separates the reservation from the rest of Southampton.
The news of the protests has spread from Indian-run radio in Canada to the editorial pages of The News From Indian Country, a newspaper.
The young Shinnecock have been radicalized by the success of tribes that were once destitute, like the Oneida Indians.
The Oneida reservation was once a tumble-down 32 acres in upstate New York, but the tribe now owns the state's largest casino and has a land claim wending its way through federal court asking for the return of 250,000 acres between Syracuse and Utica.
As a result, the young group of Shinnecock are talking aggressively about claiming 3,600 acres of prime Southampton real estate that includes three golf courses _ among them the renowned Shinnecock Hills, site of the U.S.
Open in 2004 _ and Southampton College of Long Island University.
It is land that once belonged to the Shinnecock.
It is land they want back.
The tribe filed a petition with the federal government three years ago seeking recognition and has since raised the specter of casinos on the East End.
``A lot of my people are scared about what we're doing,'' said Becky Genia, 43, who left the reservation as a teen-ager in the mid-1970s and learned the politics of protest with the American Indian Movement.
``We're surrounded by very rich people.
The folks on the res think that raising Cain about broken promises and miserable living conditions means they're going to take what little land we got left.
I got news: they aren't going to touch another acre of it''.
Developers say that they hold a title to the disputed 62 acres that dates back more than a century, and their claim to the property is built on firm legal ground.
``The homes are being built as we speak,'' said John Bennet, a lawyer for the developers, Parrish Pond Associates.
``The Indians' lawsuit was thrown out of court''.
The Indians have stopped short of laying formal claim to the 62 acres, but say the wooded site is a small but sacred portion of their heritage that should be preserved.
The Shinnecock are a state-recognized tribe, but one of more than 100 Indian tribes not acknowledged by the federal government.
They have no access to federal education and health money and run no gambling operations.
More important, they receive no legal assistance from the Bureau of Indian Affairs, so their land claims hang in limbo.
According to records, in the early 18th century, the town of Southampton paid the tribe $20 for its land and gave it a 1,000-year lease on the 3,600 acres.
In 1859, town officials convinced the state legislature that the Shinnecock were willing to break that lease to allow the Long Island Rail Road to go through in exchange for outright title to the current reservation on Shinnecock Neck.
John Strong, a professor emeritus of history at Southampton College, said he believes the Shinnecock were pressured into the deal and that the signatures on the document were faked.
If a court should ever rule in the Shinnecock's favor, the tribe would hold legal title to billions of dollars in property.
``This new group of Indians have got people's attention,'' said state Sen.
Kenneth LaValle, a Republican who represents the area.
``The buzzword is casino.
Right now, the Indians don't have a friend in the world, but if they get the feds on board, imagine the fight.
The Hamptons are the playground of the powerful.
You think they'll stand for rabble coming out from the city to play cards, get drunk and urinate on their hedgerows''?
(STORY CAN END HERE.
OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS) New homes are being built on the reservation by retirees who, after living in black society in cities like Washington and Los Angeles, have returned to the reservation, where they pay no property taxes.
The income disparity on the reservation has widened.
The main employers are the smoke shops and hot dog stands that line the highway and serve the weekend tourists.
The tribal schoolhouse has been closed and Indian children attend public schools.
The Shinnecock, for the most part, take a hostile view of politics, whether they are federal, state, town or tribal.
But it is especially the tribal politics that tie the community in knots.
Without a coherent voice of resistance for the tribe, the bulldozers continue to clear trees.
``Those old dogs, they're in it for themselves,'' said Ruben Bess Valdez, 45, a university-trained environmentalist, speaking of the tribal trustees.
He said the leaders have in the past made land-use and right-of-way deals with the state, kept the money for themselves and kept the tribe in the dark.
``If you're in it for yourself, how can you fight for anyone else''?
With little money for court battles, the tribe remains divided over the more aggressive tactics.
On one side are the tribal trustees who hold nearly all the decision-making power in the lives of the 500 people on the reservation.
On the other side are the brash group of college- and street-educated Indians who want a settlement now.
``We need changes now,'' said Chuck Quinn, who has been arrested for sitting on the 18th green at Shinnecock Hills in protest.
``No more selling us out, no more backdoor deals with the whites''.
So the Indians await word of their application for federal recognition.
Such status would give the tribe the right to negotiate gambling deals with the state.
The application process can take years, experts say, and the tribal trustees have yet to respond to a 1998 letter from the Bureau of Indian Affairs requesting more application materials.
Federal recognition would also mean that the tribe would have to draft a new constitution and set up a new government.
``The truth of the matter is that we need to come together on the reservation before we can make our demands to the general public,'' said Harold Dent, a Shinnecock and an adviser to the tribal trustees.
``I am trying to make this point to the trustees.
But people running around shouting willy-nilly isn't going to help our situation''.
The reservation is a world apart from the rest of the Hamptons.
Cancer rates among the Shinnecock are among the highest on Long Island.
In a town where a pool-side bungalow rents for $30,000 for the summer, the median per capita income on the reservation hovers around $6,000.
The reservation, in addition, has yet to be hooked up to the Suffolk County water supply.
The Indians drink from an aquifer that is contaminated with the pesticide Temik at levels seven times the amount considered safe for human consumption, according to the county health department.
``The water authority simply won't run them pipes,'' said the Southampton town supervisor, Vincent Cannuscio.
``Somebody has to pay for it.
And it's going to have to be the Shinnecock''.
The Indians also cannot get home-improvement loans because the land is held in common and they have no mortgages.
What is more, no Indian holds any meaningful elected or appointed town position.
``Their situation is the dirty little secret of Southampton,'' said Bob Zellner, a civil rights activist and adjunct professor of history at Southampton College.
WINDOW ROCK, Ariz.
_ The tranquil shore of Wheatfields Lake, a high-country fishing hole set among the ponderosa and sandstone here on the Navajo Reservation, would seem an unlikely place to encounter violence.
But a 26-year-old Navajo man who called himself Bam Bam was prepared for the worst, filling his battered pickup truck with gas before setting off with his brother to catch some trout.
Too many times, Bam Bam said, gang rivals had beaten him while he was walking home in the dark.
In a few other instances, said Bam Bam, speaking on the condition that he be identified only by his nickname, he had done the attacking and had served time in jail for assault.
``It's gotten almost like the inner city here,'' said Bam Bam, unzipping his jacket to show a pistol hidden inside.
The spread of violent crime here on the Navajo Reservation, a vast territory of dry plains and red rock mesas in the Four Corners region of the Southwest, reflects problems on dozens of the nation's Indian reservations.
While homicide and assault rates have declined across much of the nation in recent years, they have soared in Indian country to rival that of the nation's cities.
As the influences of the modern world grow, many reservations _ especially those in the West _ suffer from problems with gangs and drugs.
The situation is compounded by the poverty that has afflicted many Indian reservations for generations.
``Our kids have satellite TV and are influenced by things going on in Chicago and New York,'' said Leonard Butler, chief of the Navajo Nation Police Department of 280 for the reservation's 200,000 residents.
``They go to Los Angeles and bring back the way of life of the city, like drive-by shootings, graffiti and tattoos''.
In response to the surge in violent crime on reservations, President Clinton proposed increasing the 1999 law-enforcement budget for the Bureau of Indian Affairs by $25 million, to $100 million.
That total was reduced significantly in recent House and Senate votes, and by time the appropriation bill emerges from a conference committee the increase could be below $10 million.
Administration officials are also considering reorganizing the law-enforcement division of the Bureau of Indian Affairs.
One option _ criticized by some tribes and praised by others _ would be to transfer the responsibility for law enforcement to the Justice Department.
To be sure, the Navajo Reservation has always had its share of violent crime, but that increased sharply in the mid-1990s.
Homicides went from an average of 35 a year at the beginning of the decade to 67 in 1996, and 57 the year after.
In the first half of 1998, 18 people have been slain on the reservation, dropping the homicide rate closer to what it was early in the decade.
In 1997, Washington had a murder rate of 55 per 100,000 population, Baltimore and Detroit had rates of 46 while Chicago had a murder rate of 27.
The picture is similar on some smaller reservations, like the Fort Peck Reservation in eastern Montana.
There, the murder rate of 1 for 675 residents in 1995 was twice that of New Orleans, according to a federal report last year on Indian law enforcement.
New Orleans, with 1 murder per 1,350 residents in 1995, has one of the highest homicide rates in the country.
Combating the crime wave is proving especially difficult because of a lack of police officers on many reservations in the West, experts say.
For example, there are 1.4 officers per thousand Navajo residents, compared with 2.9 per thousand for other small communities, the federal report said.
The Navajo Reservation is primarily dependent on federal money.
The shortage of officers was apparent here over two recent nights, when the officers intervened in drunken domestic fights, hospitalized a man who drank antifreeze and arrested about a half-dozen people on charges of public intoxication.
Because only three officers are on duty for evening shifts in a district of 3,055 square miles that includes Window Rock, where the reservation's government is based, some calls for assistance went unanswered for hours.
There are seven police districts on the reservation.
``We know we need more police officers,'' said Officer Roanna Buck, ``but that's up to the politicians.
The tribal leadership is overlooking the crime because they don't want to admit that it's happening''.
(STORY CAN END HERE.
OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS) Another disparity frequently cited by the police is the lack of equipment, such as helicopters and computers mounted in squad cars, commonly found in police departments of comparable size to the reservation.
Many reservation residents are frustrated.
Seated in a round hogan, a traditional Navajo home built with logs that has a red dirt floor, Lorraine Nelson, 60, a teacher from Window Rock, recalled an earlier era when children spent their days herding sheep and assisting the tribe rather than getting in trouble.
``Today's kids have lost respect for their parents and their neighbors,'' she said.
``I don't know how to turn it around''.
A dilapidated housing project in Fort Defiance, a few miles north of Window Rock, is considered by many residents to be one of the most dangerous neighborhoods on the reservation.
The barren lots and graffiti-covered houses are the territory of the Cobras, a gang of young men whose members battle their rivals, the Dragons, with baseball bats.
``To stay strong we had to band together,'' said a 24-year-old Navajo gang member who uses the name Strange.
``It was more for fun at first, but then people took it to the next level''.
But gang violence does not fully explain the reservation's predicament.
Often, people are killed by family members or friends in petty disputes, often involving alcohol.
Over the past few years, the Navajo police force has implemented programs intended to curtail crime.
For example, 45 officers were added to the force.
Their salaries were paid with new federal grants, though the police chief complained that the money did not supply the uniforms and patrol cars needed for them.
The department also has a gang unit, a community policing program and school programs intended to discourage children from using illegal drugs.
The tribal leadership and other community leaders have begun summer work programs for young people and, in some cases, are evicting problem families from public housing.
But if such efforts are to succeed, the police say, they will have to reach boys like the three, ages 13 and 14, who were relaxing on a housing project porch on a recent afternoon.
As one of their mothers sewed inside the house, the boys spoke admiringly of drug dealing and violence by two older relatives who are gang members and contemplated joining the gang one day themselves.
&UR; NEW AMERICA NEWS SERVICE &QC; &UR; (Distributed by New York Times Special Features) &QC; &UR; To purchase this material contact New York Times Syndicate Sales Executive DEBORAH WEYDERT at 1-732-390-4480). &QL;
CROW AGENCY, Mont.
_ First the Crow were bullied by the Sioux from these red cliffs and rolling yellow hills of buffalo grass.
Later they struck an alliance with the United States and fell here alongside Custer.
In time, Washington force-fed treaties to the Crow, bunching them on the reservation while inviting in white settlers as models of how to run a store or farm the land.
Prosperity has yet to reach the undulating horizon of south-central Montana's Indian country, but the Crow have caught on to that most loathed of European imports _ the tax.
Aimed at the tourist trade, a tribe-levied surcharge sets white fishing guides, shopkeepers and service station owners to griping about taxation without representation.
To those whites who feel unwelcome on the 2.5 million-acre reservation, who feel officially less than Indians living under the same huge sky, the Crow say tough.
``If you don't like it,'' said Carl Venne, the Crow's director of public safety, ``then get the hell out of here''.
Like the Crow, tribes throughout the country move with new resolve to exercise an old asset: sovereignty.
It is that dominion that makes them not just another census category, but hundreds of nations within a nation.
This peculiar status stems from a time when Indians controlled more than three-fourths of what would become the United States, prompting the writers of the Constitution to place tribes on an equal footing with foreign nations.
The ``white fathers'' in Washington underlined that status in 371 treaties that followed.
Since 1830 the Supreme Court has affirmed that although tribes are domestic and dependent, they are still part of an American family of governments entitled to self-rule.
That sovereignty opens the way for casinos, guarantees American Indians extraordinary fishing and hunting rights, allows them to sell gasoline and cigarettes on Indian territory free of state taxes.
Those Indians-only enterprises, in turn, give new resources to some of the poorest Americans in the United States.
That money also serves as life support for hundreds of dying languages and offers a sliver of hope for the survival of customs overwhelmed by European-bred culture.
Yet the show of treaty-backed authority cues wails of protest from non-Indians.
``I can't participate in their government,'' said Gordon Rose, a former lawyer who runs an outfitters shop and a small group of cabins near the Bighorn River.
The Crow have put a lien on his business for not paying the sales tax they first imposed in 1995.
``Why should I be subject to their control''?
That argument, say tribes, overlooks history and the law.
``You hear people talking about special rights that are anachronistic or ancient,'' said Steven Tullberg, who directs the Washington, D.C., office of the Indian Law Resource Center, based in Helena, Mont.
``Most of those rights are younger than our Constitution.
We don't disparage the Constitution by saying it's ancient''.
Assigning different rights to one group based on bloodlines may seem anomalous in this republic born of a declaration that ``all men are created equal''.
But sovereignty clearly means recognizing Indians as not only Native Americans but also as special Americans.
Indians working on reservations avoid state income taxes but pay federal income and Social Security taxes.
They can vote in local, state and federal elections _ a right that didn't exist for them in New Mexico, for instance, until 1948.
But a non-Indian resident of a reservation has no say in tribal government.
An Indian who commits a crime outside a reservation is destined for the usual federal, state or local courts.
Indian authorities deal with tribal members for minor crimes on reservations but turn to the FBI or the U.S.
Bureau of Indian Affairs police to deal with murders, armed robberies or organized crime.
That can get confusing when, for instance, a non-Indian is burglarized on a reservation.
If the burglar is a member of the tribe, then tribal police handle the case.
If the burglar is white, then a county sheriff might step in.
But who's in charge until you catch the thief?
It isn't always clear, either, what constitutes Indian country.
Treaties dating sometimes to the 18th century often contradict each other.
But on land that is theirs, tribes can decide whether to set zoning, to ban alcohol or to open casinos.
``Without (reservations), and the claim to separate government they represent, Indians would, for all practical purposes, be no different from other ethnic minorities in the United States,'' wrote Fergus Bordewich in ``Killing the White Man's Indian''.
Along with granting tribes self-rule and reserving them land, the federal government still pays for vast territory taken from tribes with a promise of sustenance.
Mostly that takes the form of services _ clinics, schools, welfare _ like those provided to poor people elsewhere.
Some tribes, such as the Cherokee in Oklahoma, have worked to wean themselves from federal dependency as funding for Indian programs has waned.
The Cherokee, for instance, generate more than half their tribal income from enterprises that include a ranch, a lumber company and several plants that manufacture wire for corporations and the military.
``Sometimes I really feel discouraged when I imagine our ancestors hearing us saying that we can't live without the (Bureau of Indian Affairs),'' said then-Cherokee Chief Wilma Mankiller to other Indian leaders in 1992.
Indians account for less than 1 percent of the U.S. population today, spread mostly across the West on 314 reservations.
The differences in culture and prosperity among the Hopi, the Mohawks, the Seminoles are as varied as those among the British, the Italians, the Russians.
Contrary to conventional wisdom, gambling has reversed the fortunes of only a few tribes.
Congress' General Accounting Office estimates that 40 percent of Indian gambling revenue comes from eight of 184 tribal casinos.
The country's largest tribe, the Navajo, twice rejected gambling.
Poverty among the Sioux on the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation in South Dakota makes theirs the poorest county in the country.
Less than a day's drive to the east finds Minnesota's Mille Lacs band of Chippewa awash in casino profits.
Despite those differences a new Indian movement grows that sees salvation in sovereignty and its foundations in U.S. law.
Thirty years ago, up to three dozen Indians practiced law.
Now most estimates put that number at more than 1,000 _ still small compared with the rest of the population, but a dramatic increase.
``Tribes are trying to come into the modern world,'' said Lawrence Baca, president-elect of the Native American Bar Association.
``Using the law is something just to get the tribes out of a situation of poverty''.
The tribes' new pragmatism also shows in more than $2 million in political donations made in the 1996 election cycle.
Their assertiveness is seen in different ways in different places: The Mashantucket Pequots in Connecticut used their location near large eastern cities to build the country's largest casino _ Indian or otherwise _ and now can guarantee each tribal member a job worth upward of $50,000 a year.
The success of those Pequots and a few other tribes in the gambling business has prompted competitors, most vocally developer Donald Trump, to complain that Indians hold an unfair advantage because they pay no taxes on their profits and enjoy different standards of regulation.
Neighbors to a new prison in south-central Missouri battled mightily, but unsuccessfully, to stop the $73 million project.
But the Iowa tribe of Oklahoma was able to halt construction last month.
The tribe said excavation could upset the remains of their ancestors _ some of the 70,000 American Indians forced to move cross-country by the Indian Removal Act of 1830.
Navajo leaders prompted outrage for briefly considering blocking all the roads into their expansive lands in Arizona, New Mexico and Utah as a declaration of their rule.
The Omaha tribe in Macy, Neb.
, has converted its failed bingo hall into a cigarette manufacturing plant and is marketing its cigarettes on reservations throughout the country.
An Indian-made product sold on Indian land is exempt from state taxes.
Consequently, full flavor, menthol, light and ultra-light Omahas can undercut the non-tribal competition.
A U.S.
Supreme Court case soon will decide whether eight Chippewa tribes may continue hunting and fishing free of any state regulation in Minnesota.
While state officials worry that ruling with the tribes could lead to a plundering of Minnesota's wild game, the tribes insist they've held the right to hunt and fish at will for 150 years.
And at a time when states fight bitterly to keep out nuclear waste, the Skull Valley band of Goshutes, barely 100 strong, is inviting the country's radioactive spent fuel rods onto its small and barren reservation southwest of Salt Lake City.
Taking in the nuclear trash could create an annuity for members of the tribe.
Although Utah hasn't explicitly conceded that the tribe can legally store the waste, the governor and the Legislature have chosen to point their efforts at the transportation of radioactive material over public lands rather than challenge outright what the Goshutes can do on their reservation.
Neighbors, meantime, feel frustrated.
``It's tough fighting somebody like the Goshutes who have that authority,'' said Chip Ward of nearby Grantsville, Utah.
So often, reservations appeared all but worthless until oil or some other bonanza was discovered.
Today, sovereignty and the power to govern a patch of land is the great find.
Consider the Coeur d'Alene tribe in northern Idaho and the lake that bears its name.
Treaties made between the tribe and federal government in 1887 and 1889 reduced the reservation's boundaries but granted the lake to the Coeur d'Alenes.
When Idaho was admitted to the union in 1890, however, it became entitled to the Constitution's promise that new states are granted all the beds, banks and waters of navigable lakes or rivers within their boundaries.
Congress didn't get around to ratifying the 1887 and 1889 treaties until 1891, a year after Idaho became a state.
To complicate things further, a presidential executive order in 1873 promised the lake to tribes, but that action never sought or gained congressional approval.
So far the Supreme Court has said that the northern two-thirds of the lake belongs to Idaho, but the tribe is still pressing a claim on the southern third.
Why does it matter?
``If the tribe owns a portion of the lake, you could have competing water quality standards, disputes over fishing seasons, questions over easements for docks and power lines,'' said Clive Strong of the Idaho attorney general's office.
Likewise, logs floated to sawmills would need to pass through tribe-controlled water.
The tribe, meantime, jealously defends the exercise of sovereignty it credits for turning around the prospects of its members in recent years.
Five years ago, before the Coeur d'Alene tribe opened a casino, unemployment among its 1,600 members was nearly 65 percent.
Now, despite legal challenges from attorneys general in Missouri and other states, the tribe is operating an on-line worldwide lottery at http:
PEACH SPRINGS, Ariz.
(AP) - When American Indians began embracing gambling as an economic development tool in the 1990s, the Hualapai tribe in northern Arizona moved quickly to open a casino at its Grand Canyon West tourist site.
Tribal leaders figured that slot machines would provide new revenue for the tribe's 1,200 members, many of whom have lived in poverty for years.
But they forgot that most of the 100,000 visitors to Grand Canyon West each year come directly from Las Vegas.
''Those people weren't coming to a casino,'' said Louise Benson, tribal chairman.
''They were coming to see the Grand Canyon''.
Less than a year after opening the casino, the Hualapai shut it down.
Instead of providing an economic boom to tribal members, it left them $1 million in debt.
''There were high hopes for that casino, but the reality of it was that we were too isolated,'' said Alex Cabillo, the tribe's director of public works.
The Hualapai tribe is one of only two whose casinos failed during the Indian gambling boom of the past decade, when revenues exploded from $100 million in 1988 to $8.26 billion in 1998.
But an Associated Press computer analysis of federal unemployment, poverty and public assistance records indicates that the vast majority of American Indians, like the Hualapai, have not realized the early ''high hopes'' of the casino boom.
Two-thirds of the American Indian population belong to poverty-stricken tribes that still don't have Las Vegas-style casinos.
Some, like the Navajo, culturally oppose gambling, while others, like the Hualapai, are too far away from major population centers to benefit.
Among the 130 tribes with Las Vegas-style casinos, those near major cities have thrived, while most others have little left after paying the bills, the AP analysis found.
Despite new gambling jobs, unemployment on reservations with established casinos held steady around 54 percent between 1991 and 1997, according to data the tribes reported to the Bureau of Indian Affairs.
Many of the casino jobs were filled with non-Indians.
''Everybody thinks that tribes are getting rich from gaming and very few of them are,'' Benson said.
Of the 500,000 Indians whose tribes operate casinos, only about 80,000 belong to tribes with gambling operations that generate more than $100 million a year.
Some of the 23 tribes with the most successful casinos - like the Shakopee Mdewakanton Dakota Tribe in Minnesota - pay each member hundreds of thousands of dollars a year.
In Scott County, which includes the Shakopee reservation south of Minneapolis, the poverty rate declined from 4.1 percent in 1989 to 3.5 percent six years later.
The reservation's unemployment rate also plummeted from 70 percent in 1991 to just 4 percent in 1997.
Such success stories belong mostly to tribes with casinos near major population centers.
The tiny Mashantucket Pequot tribe of Connecticut reported more than $300 million in revenue in the first five months of this year from its Foxwoods Casino, located between New York and Boston.
And the Seminole Tribe's Hollywood Gaming Center on Miami's Gold Coast generates more than $100 million a year with pull-tab slot machines.
The unemployment rate on that reservation, however, still was 45 percent in 1997, and the average poverty rate in the two counties it touches rose from 10.4 percent in 1989 to 12.1 percent in 1995.
For many tribes with Las Vegas-style casinos, like the San Carlos Apaches in eastern Arizona, gambling revenues pay for casino operations and debt service, with little left to upgrade the quality of life.
In counties that include reservations with casinos, the average poverty rate declined only slightly between 1989 and 1995, from 17.7 percent to 15.5 percent, the AP analysis founds.
Counties that include reservations without casinos saw their poverty rate remain steady at slightly more than 18 percent.
Nationally, the poverty rate hovered around 13 percent during the period.
In California, the Tachi Yokut Tribe in the San Joaquin Valley brags on its Web site that its Palace Gaming Center has provided employment for tribal members, helped raise education levels and upgraded housing.
But the poverty rate in Kings County, which includes the tribe's small reservation, climbed from 18.2 percent in 1989 to 22.3 percent in 1995.
The reservation's unemployment rate dropped slightly to 49.2 percent in 1997.
Jonathan Taylor, a research fellow at the Harvard University Project on American Indian Economic Development, said many investments gaming tribes have made in social and economic infrastructure don't translate into immediate improvements in quality-of-life indicators like poverty.
''You see investments arising out of gaming taking hold slowly in greater educational success, greater family integrity, greater personal health, greater crime prevention,'' he said.
There are some optimistic signs that tribes hope to build on as they begin paying off their casino construction loans.
The analysis indicates casino gambling has slowed, though not reversed, the growth of tribal members on public assistance.
Participation in the Agriculture Department's Food Distribution Program on Indian Reservations increased 8.2 percent from 1990 to 1997 among tribes with casinos, compared with 57.3 percent among tribes without them.
And economic development has been spurred in communities near tribal casinos, according to an analysis of the Census Bureau's County Business Patterns for 1990 and 1997.
The Oneida Indian Nation in central New York, for example, has become the largest employer in Oneida and Madison counties, thanks to a casino that's generating more than $100 million in annual revenues.
A championship golf course and convention center are under construction.
But overall, the new jobs have not reduced unemployment for Indians.
Tribes with established casinos saw their overall unemployment rate actually rise four-tenths of a point to 54.4 percent between 1991 and 1997, the AP analysis found.
Jacob Coin, former executive director of the National Indian Gaming Association, said that's because 75 percent of jobs in tribal casinos are held by non-Indians.
At the Fort Mojave Indian Reservation along the California-Arizona-Nevada border, the unemployment rate climbed from 27.2 percent in 1991 to 74.2 percent in 1997.
Tribal administrator Gary Goforth acknowledged few of the 675 jobs at the tribe's two financially troubled casinos are filled by tribal members.
''Not everybody wants to be a dealer, or a housekeeper or even a manager in the restaurant,'' he said.
On the Net: AP Web site with additional Indian gambling data: http://wire.ap.org National Indian Gaming Commission: http://www.nigc.gov/ Bureau of Indian Affairs: http://www.doi.gov/bureau-indian-affairs.html National Indian Gaming Association: http://www.indiangaming.org/
WASHINGTON (AP) --Seeking to get a more accurate count of the country's American Indian population, the Census Bureau is turning to tribal leaders and residents on reservations to help overcome long-standing feelings of wariness or anger toward the federal government.
The relationship hasn't been stress-free, tribal leaders say, but there has been marked improvement from 1990, when Census officials estimate it missed about 4.5 percent of the American Indian population.
The national undercount rate was 1.6 percent.
For instance, on the 17 million-acre Navajo Nation reservation that sprawls across Arizona, New Mexico and Utah, about one in eight Navajos were not counted in 1990.
The tribe is determined not to let that happen again.
''We've created an alliance with the Census Bureau where the Navajo nation has profound control over the count, by way of hiring our own Navajo people to go out and enumerate, and the maps for enumeration were created by Navajo chapters,'' said Mellor Willie, spokesman for tribal president Kelsey Begaye.
More alarming to the National Congress of American Indians governmental affairs director Jack Jackson, Jr.
is that an estimated 12.2 percent of all Indians living on reservations were missed.
Part of the problem in Navajo country and other reservations was that census workers in 1990 were relying on outdated maps, and may have been unaware of tribal customs, Jackson said.
The Navajo government estimates there are about 250,000 Navajos today.
Willie said the Navajos missed out on $110 million in federal funding in the 1990s because of the undercount.
''I don't think a lot of Navajo people within the last census count knew this was helping in their communities,'' Willie said.
To counter that, the Census Bureau sought more input from tribal governments five years ago, said Tom Beavers, partnership specialist for the regional census center in Kansas City, Mo.
''When we hire now, we want to hire people who live in their own communities to work in their own communities, and we have told Indian leaders in our communities that,'' said Beavers, himself an American Indian, who in his job works with tribes in Oklahoma and Minnesota.
Federal programs distributed to American Indians based on census data include the Native American Employment and Training Programs, grants to local education agencies for Indian education, and family violence prevention and services.
Not everything has gone smoothly though.
Earlier this month, leaders on the Blackfeet Reservation in Montana threatened to arrest census workers after complaints that local census managers failed to keep him informed of hiring decisions and other business on the reservation.
The order has since been rescinded.
Others like Brenda Boyd, census liaison for the Mille Lacs Band of Chippewa in Onamia, Minn.
, complain that at times, there is too much red tape in getting simple answers from regional census officials.
Everyone agrees, though, that they are better off than in 1990.
''This census is much better,'' Boyd said.
''Last time, the count was way off''.
----- On the Net: Census Bureau Web site: http://www.census.gov Bureau of Indian Affairs Web site: http://www.doi.gov/bureau-indian-affairs.html National Congress of American Indians Web site: http://ncai.org
HIGHLAND, Calif.
_ A century after Indian wars roiled the West, another battle is raging here over a ballot measure that would expand the state's $1.4 billion Indian gambling industry.
It pits California's gaming tribes against an unlikely coalition of Nevada casinos, unions, church groups and other businesses in what may become the most expensive fight in California political history.
A visit to the San Manuel Indian Bingo and Casino on a patch of tribal land 60 miles east of Los Angeles makes the stakes clear.
The afternoon sun is still high, but the parking lot is filling fast, and inside the smoky 90,000-square-foot gambling hall, the hopeful already sit glued to most of the 1,000 video slot machines and to row after row of bingo tables.
This 24-hour no-frills casino is an economic miracle for the tiny San Manuel tribe, which once scratched out an income raising apricots and lived in shacks and trailers on a dusty 648-acre reservation.
Now, 40 landscaped houses dot the hillsides behind the casino's walls, and security officers on bicycles patrol newly paved roads.
But the San Manuel Indians have a problem: They and about 40 other tribes began installing slot machines over the last decade without first reaching compacts with the state, as required by federal law.
So Gov.
Pete Wilson and federal prosecutors consider their casinos illegal and have moved to shut them down.
In response, the gaming tribes are sponsoring a hotly contested ballot measure in the Nov.
3 election that would allow broad expansion of casino-style gaming on Indian lands statewide.
In a potent illustration of the power of gambling money in politics, it seems likely to set a new record for spending on a ballot initiative here.
Already, the two sides have raised at least $60 million and spent about $53 million, mostly for a barrage of competing television commercials.
About $43 million has been raised by tribes, $22 million of it from the San Manuel tribe alone, while opponents, led by the casino operators at Hilton Hotels Corp.
and Mirage Resorts Inc.
, who fear untaxed Indian competition, have raised $15.5 million and spent $1 million more.
The previous spending record for a single measure was $57.5 million on a securities fraud proposal two years ago; $84 million was spent on a group of competing insurance reform measures in 1988.
Public polls have shown the gambling measure, Proposition 5, winning majority, but not overwhelming, support among voters, many of whom are sympathetic to decades of Indian privation in a state that paid bounties for Indian body parts in the 1850s.
The gaming tribes contend that nothing less than their historic sovereignty and economic survival is at stake, and their advertisements feature members attesting that Indian gaming has broken the cycle of poverty.
``This is our livelihood,'' said Ken Ramirez, 38, vice-chairman of the San Manuel tribe, who grew up on the reservation when it held only a handful of families, with water too fetid to drink.
He declined to disclose the tribe's revenues from gaming, but noted that about 110 people now live on the reservation, where, with gambling proceeds, the tribe has drilled 16 deep wells and plans to market bottled water commercially.
But opponents of Proposition 5 accuse the gaming tribes of scare tactics.
They say the tribes' campaign exaggerates the threat to Indian welfare and obscures the real menace of a measure that would allow the spread of gambling throughout the state, divert business from privately operated theme parks, racetracks and card rooms and yet provide few economic benefits over all, because Indian casinos pay no taxes on their profits, though gamblers pay income taxes on their winnings.
``Frankly, I think it's an incredible con game,'' said Frank Schubert, who is managing the ``No on 5'' campaign for the Coalition Against Unregulated Gambling, which has run ads in which a jogging couple is stunned by a volcanic eruption of garish casino signs in their neighborhood.
``We've had millions and millions in TV ads bombarding the state for months now about reservations getting electricity and being able to be linoleum on a dirt floor, when in fact it's a handful of tribes spending a fortune to keep a special deal''.
About one-third of the 557 Indian tribes around the nation, including tribes in Connecticut, Minnesota and Wisconsin, now offer some form of gambling.
The 1988 federal Indian Gaming Regulatory Act affirmed tribes' rights to offer bingo, and, subject to negotiated compacts with individual states, slot machine games.
But some governors have complained about vagaries in the law and Congress has debated making clarifications.
In other states where Indians are either seeking gambling compacts or negotiating the renewal of existing ones, the California debate is being closely watched.
(STORY CAN END HERE.
OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS) nn ``From a national perspective, many states and tribes have already resolved this,'' said John Dossett, general counsel of the National Congress of American Indians in Washington, which represents 250 tribes.
``If this issue were to be resolved in California, there'd be less pressure in Congress''.
But resolution here seems unlikely any time soon.
Opponents of Proposition 5 warn that if it passes, it will immediately be tied up in years of litigation, and could well violate the California State Constitution's ban on ``Nevada or New Jersey-type casinos''.
``We're in for a long battle here instead of a politically negotiated solution in which both sides say, `Let's make this work,''' said Cathy Christian, counsel to the Coalition Against Unregulated Gambling.
The gaming tribes say they are prepared to fight.
They complain that they have been caught in an impossible situation because, eager for revenue, they began offering gambling while their right to do so was still being litigated.
Since then Wilson, a Republican and a foe of gambling in general, has refused to negotiate a compact with any tribe that was already gambling.
``Without Proposition 5, the gaming that currently exists on Indian lands in California could be taken away from the tribes,'' said Waltona Manion, a spokeswoman for the tribal alliance known as Californians for Indian Self-Reliance.
``Why remove something that's working, and that's proven to have taken these tribes off of welfare dependency and put them on the road to self-sufficiency''?
But Wilson has offered a clear alternative.
Last spring, he reached an agreement with the Pala Band of Mission Indians in San Diego County that would allow a new form of video slot machine but outlaw those now used by gambling tribes.
In the months since, 10 more tribes, some of them under threat of federal action, have signed the Pala compact, which limits each tribe to 199 of the new machines but allows them to lease rights for unused machines to other tribes, up to a maximum of 990 for any tribe, with a statewide cap of 19,900.
The State Legislature ratified the agreements in August.
Most of the gaming tribes contend that Wilson, who is barred from seeking a third term this year, refused to negotiate in good faith, as required by the 1988 federal law.
So Proposition 5 leaves little to chance, flatly requiring the state to grant a compact allowing slot machines in perpetuity for any tribe that wanted them, though, as is now the case, the measure would only allow games in which players bet against a pool of other players' money, not against the casino house itself, as in Las Vegas and Atlantic City.
Opponents of the measure contend that it is not needed to protect Indian gambling, and to hammer home the point, they are now running television advertisements featuring Paula Lorenzo, head of the Rumsey Band of Wintun Indians, which signed the Pala compact and is expanding its Cache Creek Casino 45 miles northwest of Sacramento.
``We're doing all this without Prop.
5,'' Ms.
Lorenzo says in the 30-second commercial as she walks through the construction site.
``No tribe needs Prop.
5 to operate casinos''.
For their part, supporters of the measure have accused their fellow tribes of being turncoats recruited by ``the big Nevada casinos,'' to oppose the proposition, in an echo of internecine betrayals of the past.
At the San Manuel Casino, which draws 3,000 to 4,000 gamblers a day and where the card dealers now wear bold ``No on 5'' T-shirts, players said they supported the measure.
``What's going to happen to these people if Proposition 5 doesn't go through''? asked Ruth Kennedy, a retired nurse who comes every day to play bingo and the slots from late afternoon until the wee hours of the morning, and who once won a $40,000 jackpot.
``Why is Vegas and them so upset with the Indian halls?
You can't tell me this place doesn't do things for the community''.
In fact, according to Steven Lengel, the casino's customer services director, it sponsors a range of school and community programs in Highland and the neighboring towns of San Bernardino and Redlands, and its uniformed security force of 250 is bigger than those of the three local cities combined.
It sells no alcohol, allows none on the premises and employs more than 1,400 people, the vast majority of them local residents.
But opponents of the measure, including the California Labor Federation AFL-CIO and the United Farm Workers, complain that it would exempt the Indian casinos from environmental and worker health and safety laws, and calls for distributing a maximum of 2 percent of the winnings from casinos with more than 400 gambling machines to non-gaming tribes.
``This idea that they're somehow spending all of their money to help their poor brothers is just not true,'' Ms.
Christian said. &QL;
ETHETE, Wyo.
_ In the face of cutbacks brought about by the overhaul of welfare programs, members of the Northern Arapaho Tribe on the Wind River Reservation have started a seven-acre community garden with donated land, seeds and equipment to grow vegetables for themselves and for the elderly and disabled who cannot work.
``We were concerned that when time runs out, when they are no longer eligible for government assistance, what are they going to do for food''? said Glen Revere, a nutritionist with the Indian Health Services on the 2.8 million-acre Wind River Reservation, about 100 miles east of Jackson, Wyo.
``Then we came up with the idea for this community garden, and it's been bigger than we ever expected in so many ways''.
At the all-volunteer garden, this is the time of year when potatoes grow larger than a man's fist, popping out of the soil, and five-foot-high cornstalks develop ears with red, yellow and white kernels ripening inside.
The conditions on these wide plains near the Wind River Range of the Rocky Mountains can be harsh, with high winds, late springs and early autumns limit the growing season to 90 days.
Revere's partner in this effort is Irene Houser, director of the Northern Arapaho Tribe Community Services, who has distributed produce around the Wind River Reservation and to the Pine Ridge Reservation in southwestern South Dakota.
Ms. Houser, a member of the Northern Arapaho Tribe, said people were stunned when she brought them bushels of potatoes, onions, squash, zucchini, tomatoes, beets, radishes and other vegetables.
``They asked, `How much are you going to charge me for this'''? she recalled.
``I said, `It's free,' and they were so happy.
Many of them didn't have food in their house when I showed up''.
Mark Soldierwolf, a 70-year-old father of nine and grandfather of nine, said: ``That food lasted us about six weeks.
We dried some things, boiled some.
Just ate all of it''.
Soldierwolf, a Northern Arapaho who served with the Marines in World War II and the Korean War, lives with his wife, Florita, one daughter and one grandchild.
They receive food stamps for a $300-a-month budget for the four of them, but they said they often fed members of their family who stopped by.
Soldierwolf estimated they saved $70 with the free vegetables.
Soldierwolf's family represents the problems that plague many of the 1.3 million American Indians who live on reservations, of whom 49 percent are unemployed.
The Bureau of Indian Affairs estimates that at least half the American Indian population lives in poverty.
Soldierwolf said all but one of his adult children were unemployed.
``If you can make it to the end of the month, you're all right,'' Soldierwolf said, referring to the monthly food stamps.
``It's worse than in the Depression''.
Mrs. Soldierwolf nodded, with tears in her eyes.
The Wyoming Department of Family Services says the Northern Arapaho on the reservation account for 18.9 percent of all welfare cases in Wyoming.
The reservation population of 12,000 _ including 6,000 Northern Arapaho tribal members, about 3,000 Shoshone tribal members and 3,000 from other tribes _ represents about 2.5 percent of the state's population of 480,000.
Revere and Ms.
Houser say the community garden can help reduce dependence on welfare by enabling residents to produce cash crops, traditional Indian plants to be sold on or off the reservation.
(STORY CAN END HERE.
OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS) On the Crow Reservation in Montana, at a five-acre garden to be planted this fall, the plan is to let people's work part at the garden count toward fulfillment of their welfare community service requirement.
``We are trying to provide people with skills that they can use here or take with them,'' said Charlene Johnson, a Crow tribal member and nutritionist with Indian Health Services.
``Indians are not horticulturists.
They were hunters and gatherers who were forced to garden when they were put on the reservations.
There is a lack of knowledge about how to plant and water crops''.
In Ethete (pronounced EE-tha-tee), the school is adding horticulture to its natural science curriculum, and students take field trips to the community garden for hands-on experience growing their own food.
Howard Lujan, a father of four, used seeds Ms.
Houser gave him to grow ceremonial Indian corn in a little garden on the side of his house.
``I will give this corn to anyone who wants some, because it is part of our religion,'' he said.
Lujan, an Arapaho tribal member, said he would use all parts of the corn, including the husk to wrap tamales he plans to make the staple of a catering business he is starting.
He is also growing pumpkins, onions and cucumbers.
``I'm pretty sure we're going to save a lot of money this year with what we've grown,'' he said. &QL;
NEW YORK _ Nancy Smith, 28, croaks about the cold weather with a smoked-out voice.
Dressed in a sweatshirt and jeans, her puffy eyes tell a story of chronic alcoholism, an all-too-common syndrome among Native Americans like her.
After returning from a cigarette break in sub-zero temperatures, Smith flops down on a couch, curls herself into a ball and falls asleep.
One of New York City's homeless, she has come for the treatment of her drinking problem.
Smith and thousands like her are seeking help for their substance abuse at the American Indian Community House, the largest of a handful of Native American cultural institutions in the New York area.
``Where else can I go for help''? she asks.
``Any place else, they don't understand you like they do here''.
Native Americans around the country are leaving reservations and relocating in urban areas at a dizzying rate.
With economic opportunities on reservations lagging behind those available in big cities, and with the unemployment rate among Native Americans at three times the national average, thousands of poor, often unskilled Native Americans are rushing off their reservations.
Many find their new urban locales strange and forbidding and often turn to drugs and alcohol.
Nearly 46,000 Native Americans live in the New York City metropolitan area.
Of that number, nearly 7,000 come to the Community House each year for drug and alcohol rehabilitation, health counseling or for job training, according to Rosemary Richmond, executive director.
This is up from around 3,000 just seven years ago.
With the vast majority of its $1.5 million annual budget, mostly federal funds, going to substance abuse treatment and job training, the Community House finds itself at risk of losing the attendance of those in need of cultural support.
As a result, some urban Native Americans feel driven away.
Richmond and her 30-member staff have been inundated with work, but less and less of it involves cultural activities.
``I used to go there all the time and hang out, meet new people,'' says Carlos Rodriguez, 48, a Navajo who works as a librarian at Columbia University.
``Now most of the people there have drug problems, so they don't even let you in without an appointment''.
The Community House, established in 1969, relies on volunteers like Rodriguez to participate in rallies, organize religious events and educate the public about Native American culture.
In recent years, problems of illiteracy and addiction have become the major part of the organization's workload.
The social problems faced by Richmond and her staff are not unique to New York City.
From 1980 to 2000, the urban Native American population has more than doubled.
With this drastic increase came a surge in urban Native Americans in need of substance abuse treatment.
In 1980, approximately 4,000 Native Americans sought treatment for substance abuse in the San Francisco area, according to the Indian Health Service, a branch of the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Today, that number has more than doubled, to 9,200.
In Seattle over the same period, addiction cases rose from 3,500 to 7,300.
Over all, the rate of substance abuse among Native American adults is over 20 percent nationwide.
And the migration from the reservations continues.
``Mostly, it's economics,'' says Joanne Dunne, a spokeswoman for the Boston Indian Council, a nonprofit cultural group.
``The reservation typically doesn't provide you with any real opportunities''.
Also, many Native Americans travel between the reservation and urban areas.
``Some tribes traditionally go from one place to another,'' says Dunne.
``The Micmacs always crossed the border from Canada to come from time immemorial''.
In other cities, city and state governments have created agencies to specifically deal with the Native American population.
In Detroit, for example, the municipal government runs the Detroit American Indian Health Center, while the state of Michigan runs the Bureau of Urban Indian Affairs.
``There's also American Indian Health, which is nonprofit and state supported,'' adds Alycia Atkinson, an administrator at Urban Indian Affairs.
``They do youth programs, alcohol, tobacco and drug intervention, and other health services.
Then there's American Indian Services, which does mental health, and also has a youth program, and they're run by the city.
And the state also supports the National American Indian Association here''.
As the state and city governments slice up their services, Detroit Native Americans, already a small group at 20,000, find themselves without a cultural or political center.
In Boston, at Dunne's Boston Indian Council, attendance lags because it does not provide substance abuse treatment, legal services or on-site training programs.
Still, it creates a sense of community among members of 36 tribes from all over the nation.
``Indians are drawn together the same way as everyone else,'' she explains.
``You look for people who look like you''.
&QL; &UR; (EDITORS: There is no charge for use of this story, but please send a tearsheet to Professor Wayne Svoboda, Columbia News Service, Graduate School of Journalism, Columbia University, 2950 Broadway, New York, N.Y. 10027).
&LR; &QL;
WASHINGTON (AP) --American Indian reservations would get an infusion of $1.2 billion in federal money for education, health care and law enforcement under President Clinton's proposed 2001 budget, a White House aide said.
Lynn Cutler, the president's top adviser on Indian issues, said it's the largest spending increase ever sought for Indians and includes new or expanded programs in nearly all federal agencies.
``It's important that we get every agency of the federal government thinking about Indians and employing Indian people,'' Cutler said Tuesday, one day after she outlined the plan to tribal leaders at a meeting of the United South and Eastern Tribes, which represents 23 tribes from Maine to Texas.
Clinton announced the spending initiative in his State of the Union address last week, but did not mention any specifics.
Those will be included in his 2001 budget proposal, to be announced next week.
Among the spending Clinton will seek: $300 million to build at least six new reservation schools, a $117 million increase for reservation road repairs, about $300 million more for the Indian Health Service and $103 million added to reservation law enforcement, Cutler said.
The head of the Interior Department's Bureau of Indian Affairs, the main agency funding tribal governments, said the extra money is welcome but won't address all the problems.
``In all, I don't think it's anything to have a party over, because the needs in Indian Country are so great,'' said Kevin Gover, a Pawnee who Clinton picked to head the BIA in 1997.
Sen. Ben Nighthorse Campbell, the only American Indian in the Senate and chairman of the Indian Affairs Committee, also was skeptical.
``Senator Campbell hates to look a gift horse in the mouth, but he does wonder why it's taken eight budgets for the president to get around to taking a look at Indian Country,'' said Chris Changery, a spokesman for the Colorado Republican.
The extra money for reservation roads will put only a tiny dent in the estimated $4 billion backlog of needed repairs.
And, according to an Interior Department report issued last year, $1.2 billion is needed to repair or replace 170 Indian schools.
``I know half-a-dozen new schools is a drop in the bucket, but at least it's a drop,'' Cutler said.
Reservations are home to some of the gravest poverty and worst health care in the country.
The unemployment rate on reservations is about 10 times the national average and only about two-thirds of Indian adults have a high school diploma, compared to three-quarters of the general population.
The Indian Health Service reports the Indian death rate is 35 times higher than the rest of the population.
Clinton will ask Congress for $13 million in new aid to the 31 tribal colleges, Cutler said.
The colleges, which serve 26,000 students in 12 states, are a vital part of efforts to improve education and economic opportunities on reservations, she said.
A report to be released today says tribal colleges have created jobs and helped increase education levels on the reservations where they operate.
The report from the Institute for Higher Education Policy and the American Indian Higher Education Consortium said median incomes for women on reservations with tribal colleges rose 49 percent faster between 1980 and 1990 than for women on reservations without colleges.
Cutler said other details of Clinton's proposal include: --$6 million for training teachers to serve schools with large numbers of Indian students.
--$5 million for training Indians as school administrators.
--$5 million for a Treasury Department program aimed at attracting companies to reservation areas.
PINE RIDGE, S.D.
(AP) --President Clinton turned the attention of his national poverty tour today to arguably the poorest, most forgotten U.S. citizens of them all: American Indians.
Clinton was going to the Pine Ridge Reservation for a visit with the Oglala Sioux nation and to participate in a conference on Native American homeownership and economic development.
He also was touring a housing facility and signing a pact with Oglala leaders establishing an empowerment zone for Pine Ridge.
But the main purpose of the visit --the first to a reservation by a president since Franklin Roosevelt -- was simply to pay attention to American Indians, who are so raked by grinding poverty that Clinton's own advisers suggested he come up with special proposals geared specifically to the Indians' plight.
At Pine Ridge, a scrolling marquee at Big Bat's Texaco expressed both joy over Clinton's visit and wariness of all the official attention: ``Welcome President Clinton.
Remember Our Treaties,'' the sign read.
According to statistics from the Census Bureau and the Bureau of Indian Affairs, there are 1.43 million Indians living on or near reservations.
Roughly 33 percent of them are children younger than 15, and 38 percent of Indian children aged 6 to 11 live in poverty, compared with 18 percent for U.S. children of all other races combined.
Aside from that, only 63 percent of Indians are high school graduates.
Twenty-nine percent are homeless, and 59 percent live in substandard housing.
Twenty percent of Indian households on reservations do not have full access to plumbing, and the majority --53.4 percent -- do not have telephones.
The per capita income for Indians is $21,619, one-third less than the national per capita income of $35,225.
An estimated 50 percent of American Indians are unemployed, and at Pine Ridge the problem is even more chronic --73 percent of the people do not have jobs.
Housing Secretary Andrew Cuomo, who visited the reservation last August, said Pine Ridge is a metaphor for the poverty tour, for it sits in Shannon County, the poorest census tract in the nation.
``This is generations of poverty on the Pine Ridge reservation, with very, very little progress,'' Cuomo said.
``We didn't get into this situation in a couple of weeks and we're not going to get out of it in a couple of weeks.
It's going to take years''.
To begin addressing the housing problem, Clinton was announcing a partnership between the Treasury Department, the Department of Housing and Urban Development, tribal governments and mortgage companies to help 1,000 Indians become homeowners over the next three years --a small number that nonetheless would double the number of government-insured home mortgages issued on tribal lands.
Under the effort, ``one-stop mortgage centers'' would be opened at Pine Ridge and on the Navajo Reservation in Arizona to help streamline the mortgage lending process.
Cuomo said special steps were needed to help Indians create and own houses because the nature of the land on which they live effectively shuts them out of conventional home loan processes.
``The land is held in trust.
The bank doesn't want to take it as collateral because it's in trust,'' Cuomo said.
``So the main asset on the reservation --the land -- can't even be used''.
Also, two of the country's largest municipal securities underwriters, Banc One Capital Markets and George K.
Baum &AMP; Co.
, were committing to underwriting $300 million in bonds annually for five years to create a market for reservation mortgages.
Those bonds would help raise $1.5 billion that could then be lent to tribes, tribal housing authorities and individuals for buying homes.
The announcement was part of Clinton's four-day, cross-country tour to highlight the ``untapped markets'' in America's inner cities and rural areas.
NEAH BAY, Wash.
_ Micah McCarty rises with the sun and slips into the chilly waters of Waatch River, just upstream from the untamed edge of the Pacific Northwest.
With each stroke, he mimics the movement of the whale he hopes to slay this fall with a hand-carved wooden harpoon.
And he prays that the gray whale will be ``a kind brother or sister''.
McCarty is preparing himself for the Makah tribe's first whale hunt in more than seven decades.
He hopes it will renew the Olympic Peninsula tribe's spirit and traditions.
Opponents call the hunt butchery, saying it has no place in a modern world where whales are protected by international law.
McCarty wants to be the ``chosen one''.
The harpooner will stand in a dugout canoe, steady himself against 10-foot Pacific swells, heft the barbed lance, take aim and plunge it into the back of a 38-foot leviathan.
The kill will be a sacred moment for the Makah, honoring the great whale.
But the eight men in the canoe _ keepers of a ritual dating back at least 100 generations _ will be encircled by an armada of outraged animal rights activists, a swarm of international media and a thin phalanx of security.
The hunt's notoriety stems from a controversial decision by the International Whaling Commission that granted the Makah the right to kill up to 20 whales through 2002.
Animal rights activists fear the hunt will spark a wholesale return to commercial whaling, presently banned by the commission.
But as the 27-year-old McCarty runs barefoot along Hobuck Beach, he does not think about the global forces aligned against the 1,800 people living in his fishing village.
Instead, he meditates and prays to make his spirit pure to receive the whale, ``an honored guest of the village''.
He anchors his feet in the sand of the beach and heaves hunks of driftwood in hopes of being chosen the harpooner.
McCarty is one of 16 men selected by Makah families to compete for eight spots on the first tribal whaling crew since the 1920s.
He feels the excitement building on this 44-square-mile reservation of heavily logged rain forest and spectacular wilderness beach located at the extreme northwest tip of the contiguous United States.
The return to whaling will be a sort of homecoming for the Makah, whose real name _ which cannot be written in English _ means ``people who live by the rocks and the seagulls''.
McCarty comes from a long line of whalers.
His grandfather and great-grandfather participated in the last hunts before whaling was suspended, because gray whales had been stalked almost to extinction by non-Indian whalers.
McCarty's father, John, until recently was executive director of the tribe's whaling commission.
After graduating from high school in Olympia, Micah McCarty came home to Neah Bay and immersed himself in the maritime life, working with his father as a commercial fisherman.
``It became a passionate connection with the waters my ancestors plied,'' McCarty said.
Like the Makah whalers before him, McCarty prepares by purifying himself in frigid streams such as the Waatch River.
``We look upon the water as its own being,'' he said.
While bathing, McCarty said he ``thinks about the whale moving gracefully through the water, and I swim as gracefully as I can.
... And I pray that our whale crew will be one mind, one body, one spirit''.
Historically, secrecy guarded every aspect of Makah whaling from the hunt to the communal butchering and feasting, according to anthropological texts.
Tribal members today remain guarded about saying too much about the hunt to outsiders.
``It is usually taboo to even talk about,'' McCarty said.
``Usually, you just prepare yourself and go whaling''.
McCarty, like his father and the rest of the tribe, is acutely aware of the international controversy surrounding this fall's hunt.
``In this day and age, it's important to say something about it,'' McCarty said.
To illustrate that whaling still defines the fabric of Makah life, McCarty shares a few words from sacred whaling songs that have been passed down from generation to generation and are still sung today.
One song says ``my canoe travels with killer whales as an escort,'' and another says ``my canoe travels with lightning''.
``I might get in trouble for telling you that, but it's not a direct translation,'' he said.
McCarty said he has wanted to hunt whales for a long time, long before they became news to the outside world.
An accomplished carver whose art is sold at a shop called Tribes in Fremont, McCarty frequently creates masks that call upon spirits related to whaling and the sea.
``As I learned about our oral history, some of the songs and dances we do, my artwork took on more meaning about who we are and where we come from''.
The other whalers said McCarty and crew member Darrell Markishtum frequently lead them in ancient paddle songs as they practice stealth and speed in the red and black dugout canoe called the Hummingbird.
``The songs keep your mind off the pain'' of paddling for hours, said Don Swan, a powerfully built man who, like McCarty, would like to be the ``chosen one'' to heft the harpoon.
Neah Bay, like many other Native American communities, is struggling with unemployment rates often exceeding 50 percent, deep poverty and the problems of crime, drug and alcohol abuse and domestic violence.
McCarty hopes the return to whaling will provide inspiration and a new focus for the community.
``It is a sacred way of life that sets an honorable example,'' he said.
Whaling ``involves so much concentration, so much preparation, that anyone who was involved in that lifestyle (substance abuse or violence) would have to drop it''.
On a rare sunny spring day, McCarty and seven other members of the crew boarded the 34-foot Hummingbird for paddle practice.
A motorized chase boat skippered by whale commissioner Arnie Hunter trailed the canoe.
Nine-year-old Eric Johnson Jr.
sat near Hunter and stared at his dad paddling in the stern.
In the background, a fog horn on Waadah Island played a haunting, two-note tune.
Eric would like to be a whaler someday.
``Yeah, I'm thinking about getting some barbells with 10-pound weights,'' he said, becoming very serious.
``I think I would want to be the harpooner.
If you're the harpooner, you have to have a lot of strength so you can stick it in the whale''.
``I really want to take after my ancestors,'' said Eric, one small example of how whaling may infuse a new generation of Makah with the old values that existed before anyone had heard of unemployment or Jim Beam.
Arnie Hunter let up on the throttle and the canoe came alongside.
The men passed little Eric between boats.
As he scrambled into the bow of the dugout canoe, a luminous smile transformed his serious face.
Sitting a couple of feet from Eric was Wayne Johnson cradling a.50-caliber military rifle designed to penetrate armor.
It will deliver the coupe de grace once the whale is harpooned, explained Johnson, hefting the weapon.
The rifle is one of the concessions to the 20th century made by the Makah.
The International Whaling Commission insists on a quick kill.
Says McCarty: ``They want us to do a humane kill.
That necessitates a quick and efficient method of ushering the whale to the next world.
I believe it to be an honorable alteration to a sacred way of life''.
But Makah elder Alberta Thompson disapproves not only of the gun, but also of the hunt itself.
``What are we building our culture on by going after something we don't want to eat''? she asked.
That a few elders in the Neah Bay community have publicly opposed the tribe's return to whaling has been used by opponents of the hunt in an attempt to discredit the tribal leadership as not representing the will of the people.
But people in Neah Bay point out that Native American communities do not have a single, monolithic viewpoint any more than other communities.
John McCarty also notes that in December's tribal council election, two men who support resurrecting whaling _ Ben Johnson Jr.
and Keith Johnson _ were voted into office.
But resurrecting whaling skills that have been dormant for more than 70 years is a daunting challenge.
So the Makah are turning for advice to other indigenous whalers.
Several members of the Makah Whaling Commission and whaling crew traveled this winter to Barrow, Alaska, for the native whaling captains convention.
They attended seminars on topics such as effective kill techniques used by the few indigenous tribes still allowed to hunt by the International Whaling Commission.
The tribe is also considering sending a couple of Makah women to Alaska to learn recipes for preparing whale meat and blubber, said Keith Johnson, president of the tribal whaling commission.
The whaling crew members are also training together.
They run together on the beach and take communal sweats in a lodge they built behind Arnie Hunter's trailer.
The young men are learning to function as a team, said rifleman Wayne Johnson.
The crew training includes paddling into the Pacific to practice ``sneaking up and backing off'' whales, said McCarty.
But many training methods will not be shared with the outside world.
For example, beginning with the first day of a new moon, the nascent whalers will do a ``special type of training,'' said McCarty.
``Four new moons prior to the hunt will be the countdown,'' said McCarty without offering further explanation.
A big part of what whaling is about for these tribal people is the bridge it creates between generations.
For example, John McCarty heard whaling stories from his father and told them to son Micah.
``In Makah Bay, they harpooned this whale, a big bull,'' said John McCarty, recounting the tale he heard from his father.
``He was big enough and strong enough that they couldn't get close enough to give him another harpoon.
He went straight out to sea (dragging the canoe by the harpoon tether).
``It was one fierce ride.
The whale was relentless; the toughest whale they had ever seen.
They looked back and Cheeka Peak was just a tiny bump.
They gave up, cut him loose, lost their harpoon and floats.
Fortunately, there was a west wind, so they set sail and headed home.
The guys were so exhausted they were laying on the bottom of the canoe''.
It is the telling of such stories across the generations that defines the Makah.
When he learned how little Eric Johnson beamed when the men passed him into the whaling canoe, Keith Johnson said: ``These are the magical moments that are happening to our youth.
How can we describe that to the world?''
LAS VEGAS _ As legalized gambling spreads, industry lines are starting to blur.
Marriages of tribal and corporate casinos, slot machines and racetracks, the Internet and everybody come at a time when the nation's gambling laws have never been murkier or more misunderstood.
State and federal lawmakers' plates are heaped with hot-potato gambling issues, and none is hotter for Congress than deciding whether to ignore, regulate or outlaw the explosion of Internet gambling.
Federal lawmakers also soon must sort out the muddled state of American Indian gambling, which has pitted tribes desperate for casino revenue against state governments resistant to gambling.
Both topics were discussed last week at the World Gaming Congress convention, along with the National Gambling Impact Study Commission report, which was issued in June.
The commission, after spending $5 million and two years researching the state of gambling in America, cooked up a casserole of 76 recommendations that ranged from criminalization of Internet gambling to the need for more research and public education.
But it did not answer the big question of whether America's infatuation with wagering had become a malignant obsession.
Instead it called for a nationwide ``pause'' in gambling expansion while states and gambling-host communities conduct their own economic- and social-impact studies and then reach their own hard decisions on whether to expand, contract or even abolish regional gambling activity.
That was hardly what the gambling industry _ or its opponents _ wanted to hear.
``People are taking whatever they want out of it to advance their own position,'' said Rick Hill, chairman of the National Indian Gaming Association, which represents 168 of the 195 U.S. tribes that offer legal casino or bingo gambling.
Even one of the commission's own members acknowledges a lack of interest by the American public and the news media.
``I think the report will disappear,'' J.
Terrence Lanni, chairman and chief executive of MGM Grand Inc.
, said last week in remarks to delegates at the international gambling industry's largest annual trade show.
But at its heart, Lanni added, the commission's work did reflect the mood of the American public _ compassion for addicted gamblers but a demand for legalized gambling.
Even if the report fades away, those paramount issues will not.
As wagering becomes ever more widespread, Congress must resolve the profound issue of Internet gambling and the politically touchy matter of tribal gambling.
More than 30 nations, mostly in the Third World, license and tax online gambling enterprises that operate through 700 sites on the World Wide Web.
The number grows almost daily.
At the moment, however, the most watched developments are in Australia, which recently permitted its states and territories to individually license and regulate sports and racetrack betting on the Internet.
U.S. gamblers are beginning to discover these legal bookies Down Under who gladly accept wagers from anywhere in the world _ seemingly daring legal retaliation from Uncle Sam.
In fact, sports book American Wagering Inc.
of Nevada holds one of the Australian licenses.
American is the only online Australian operator not accepting U.S. bets, but only because that action could jeopardize its U.S. licenses.
That doesn't bother American's CEO, Vic Salerno, who said he was convinced that his company had taken the Internet plunge in the right nation and at the right time.
And if the United States never joins the global cyber party, Salerno said, so what?
``There's enough money left out there outside of the United States,'' he said.
Robust international betting on events such as World Cup soccer, Formula I auto racing, cricket and rugby ``makes the NFL (sports books) look like child's play,'' he said.
Brian Gordon, an Australian territorial government gambling regulator, predicted at one World Gaming Congress seminar last week that Australian regulatory and consumer protection statutes would become the model as other rich nations, one by one, accept the inevitability of worldwide cyber gambling.
Meanwhile, the First World's foremost society debates whether to ban Internet gambling and almost certainly usher in a new Prohibition era _ this time featuring bootleg e-commerce sports bookies and slot machines.
Current U.S. law on gambling by ``wire'' communications was written in the 1960s, tying the hands of federal prosecutors with statutes that never imagined the legal complexities of offshore cyber casinos and bookies with toll-free phone lines, and bank accounts that can afford huge U.S. advertising budgets and platoons of silk-tie lawyers.
Sen. Jon Kyl, a Republican from Arizona, for two years has been pushing for outright prohibition of such high-tech gambling, and his Senate Bill 692 is heading toward a floor vote this fall.
House action is not expected until 2000.
Republican Sen.
Kit Bond of Missouri is a co-sponsor of the Kyl bill.
In a recent interview, Bond spokesman Dan Hubbard acknowledged the technological challenge of enforcing a nationwide ban.
``But that's no reason to throw up your hands,'' he said.
Bond has concerns about the spread of gambling that defies international boundaries.
``Most of these are based offshore,'' Hubbard said.
``You can't regulate it''.
Earlier failed versions of the Kyl bill would have made criminals of Internet casino executives and their customers.
In the latest version the public is let off the hook, as are fantasy-sports players and some pari-mutuel wagering operations.
The national commission bolstered Kyl with its own call for a ban, criminal prosecution and even diplomatic pressure from the United States on nations that ``harbor Internet gambling organizations that prey on U.S. citizens''.
The problem is enforcement.
``I have serious doubts the Internet can be controlled by the federal government,'' Lanni said.
One idea out there would make cyber-gambling police of the U.S. banking industry, whose plastic accounts are the currency of choice for many in the online betting industry.
Barring the use of U.S. credit cards for Internet wagering would certainly put a damper on casual gamblers, but such legislation could be difficult to pass and would be a nightmare for the banking industry to implement.
And for serious gamblers, there still would be many ways around a credit block _ money orders and Australian or European bank-issued credit cards, for instance.
Domestically, commercial casino companies such as Station Casinos Inc.
are aggressively positioning themselves for the cyber-gambling era by teaming up with online operators.
Indian tribes are in court fighting for the right to establish multistate bingo, lottery and casino games that offer big jackpots.
One such tribal Internet lottery case is scheduled to be argued Thursday in a Kansas City federal courtroom.
``It's so un-American to back away from a challenge,'' said Jacob L.
Coin, executive director of the tribal gaming association.
``They (in Congress) fear the Internet because they don't understand it.
So they are just going to ban it...
run and hide.
``Let's look to what Australia is doing.
Let's learn from them.
Let's find a way to benefit from it''.
Bowing to a court ruling, Congress in 1988 laid out a statutory framework allowing American Indian tribes to offer high-stakes bingo games and casino-style gambling on their historic reservation lands.
In the decade since, almost no one is satisfied with how those laws have played out.
A congressional revision of the law seems inevitable in the next year or so.
The problems are tangled ones.
Few states receive taxes or significant revenue from what has blossomed into an $8 billion-a-year industry.
The states' regulatory role is often minimal.
Worse, governors _ Kansas' Bill Graves among them _ increasingly argue that states' rights have been trampled in a headlong rush to nurture needy tribes with this ``new buffalo'' of tribal sustenance.
The tribes, meanwhile, interpret assertion of states' rights as an assault on their sovereignty as legally independent nations.
That stance irritates the commercial casino industry, which competes with the tribes but must pay taxes and conform to tight state regulation.
By and large, each tribe regulates itself in conformance with broad federal rules that demand very little public accountability.
``Native American tribes need to be a little less geared to using sovereignty to protect themselves,'' said MGM's Lanni.
``They should have to disclose information like the rest of us.
Native Americans should come into the (gaming industry) mainstream''.
Such talk also rankles.
``Tribes feel under attack,'' Coin said.
``Instead of applauding the early successes of Indian gaming, there are those who are trying to undermine it''.
The bottom line, Coin said, ``is that the quality of life on tribal reservations is improving'' solely because of gambling dollars.
Tribal law expert and Minnesota lawyer Tom Foley told World Gaming Congress delegates that Indian gambling was entering a new era.
``This is a game of politics now,'' he said.
``Tremendous dollars are at stake''.
The commercial casino industry and state officials will push Congress to level the playing field with tribal gambling.
The tribes will resist.
Coin stated the tribes' case eloquently last week in Las Vegas in remarks that defiantly recalled centuries of injustice: ``When our children are as healthy as yours, when our futures are as bright as yours, then we can talk about a level playing field.''
SPARTA, Ga.
_ By 10 o'clock on a typical summer's morning, Hancock County is almost deserted.
A few children play in overgrown backyards full of junk cars and rotting timbers, and older people fan themselves on sagging porches.
But almost anyone who works has left the county hours before, because there are virtually no jobs in Hancock.
The term ``pocket of poverty'' cannot begin to describe the overwhelming stillness of a county with no economy: the deserted roads and store aisles, the fertile old cotton fields untilled and overgrown.
Every employer of any size has left, and new ones seeking cheap land look at the county's statistics _ more than half the adults did not finish high school, seven of ten births are to unwed mothers _ and say no thanks.
Unspoken in most of those decisions is the knowledge that Hancock's population is 82 percent black, the highest percentage in Georgia and the fourth highest in the nation.
Most of Georgia is prospering now, and the state's unemployment descended to a record low of 4.1 percent last month.
But only 80 miles from Atlanta's economic turbine, the jobless rate was 10.7 percent in Hancock County, and its per capita income of $15,390 is a third less than the rest of the state.
The county's leaders have begged for projects no one else wanted: poultry processing plants, a landfill, a waste incinerator.
Everything has fallen through except for the prison the state agreed to build a few years ago outside of this crumbling county seat, cut off from the county's 9,134 residents by empty miles and a haze of razor wire.
So it was probably inevitable, given how money is spent in the South these days, that Hancock County would place its hopes for an economic future on the ultimate last resort _ an Indian gambling casino.
For the last six weeks, ever since the tiny Kialegee Indian tribe in Oklahoma expressed an interest in coming, county residents have talked of nothing else.
``It's the last chance for our county,'' said Lesley James Roberts, Hancock's special projects director, who is spending almost all his time on the casino project.
``Think about what all those tourists could do for us.
We'd have the money to restore all those antebellum homes on the old plantations, and the storefronts in town and maybe do historical re-enactments.
It would give our people a chance to become independent''.
The casino is a long way from becoming a reality.
Among other hurdles, the state and the tribe would have to negotiate a compact for a reservation, and Gov.
Roy E.
Barnes has said he was opposed to casino gambling, although the state runs a lottery.
(The federal government could approve the project if the state refuses).
But in the meantime, an instant bond has been formed between two groups of impoverished people, each of whom is relying on the other to achieve a dream of prosperity.
The Kialegees, numbering about 450, are a landless tribe, sharing space in Wetumka, Okla.
, with the much larger Creek Nation, to whom they are related.
Along with several other Creek tribes, they trace their origin to northern and central Georgia, from which they were forcibly resettled 160 years ago along the Trail of Tears.
The tribe has tried several times to build casinos elsewhere but has been rebuffed, most recently in Carroll County, Ga.
, on the Alabama border west of Atlanta.
Carroll County residents, close enough to Atlanta to benefit from its boom, said they feared crime and disruption from the casino, but the reception has been very different in Hancock.
Most residents here are descendants of slaves who once worked the plantations in the area, and Hancock is one of a string of largely black counties stretching from Virginia to East Texas known as the Black Belt.
Most of those counties are significantly more impoverished than their neighbors, even in a time of national bounty.
In May, after R.
Allen Haywood, the editor and publisher of the weekly Sparta Ishmaelite, noticed an article about Carroll County's rejection, he suggested to Hancock County officials that they contact the tribe.
Kialegee leaders were immediately interested, and received a warm reception at an overflowing town meeting here last week.
They were even more intrigued when they learned that there are several large Indian mounds in Hancock County, of unknown origin and dating back hundreds of years.
``There was an almost instant camaraderie between the tribal members and the citizens of the county,'' said Kenneth R.
Baldwin, who runs an investment group in McAlester, Okla.
, that is representing the Kialegees.
``They both have an understanding of what it means to have to struggle, to not have the opportunities you'd like to have.
The tribe felt more welcome there than anywhere else they have been''.
Residents of the county have heard all of society's warnings about gambling, and are aware that it is not always a pathway out of distress.
But they have also seen marketing studies showing that there is no other full-fledged casino in Georgia, Florida or the Carolinas, and are convinced gamblers will make their way to this nearly abandoned county once the lights flash on the proposed casino, hotel and golf course.
Considering Hancock's current situation _ in which the largest employer is its public school system _ the county's leaders say they could hardly do worse.
``This is a place where people are struggling to keep a roof over their heads and clothes on their backs,'' Roberts said.
``Our history hasn't put us in a position to be very selective about what we want.''
TOPPENISH, Wash.
(AP) --At Tiny's Tavern, bartender Nena Garcia wonders how much longer she'll be employed.
The Yakama Nation, which already bans liquor sales on tribal land, has imposed a new tax on alcohol sold on private land within the reservation and a $5,000 license fee on liquor distributors.
The move has been criticized by the governor and it raises legal questions about the authority of tribes to tax non-Indians.
Indian tribes across the country have taken various steps to curb alcohol-related problems.
Last July, the Blackfeet Tribal Council banned liquor sales on its Montana reservation for five days and suggested it could be the forerunner of year-round prohibition.
Activist Russell Means in October suggested opening a liquor store near South Dakota's Pine Ridge Indian Reservation, which is officially dry, and using the profits to treat alcoholism.
Stores in Whiteclay, Neb.
--just two miles from the reservation -- sell millions of dollars worth of beer each year, most of it to Oglala Sioux.
The Yakama tribe's moves affect some 50 businesses.
At least two major distributors already have refused to deliver to the central Washington reservation, and that means Tiny's, in nearby Wapato, hasn't been able to get any beer.
"We're stocked for a little bit, maybe a month or so.
After that I don't know," Ms.
Garcia said.
"I'm afraid I might lose my job".
Gov. Gary Locke, who opposes the Yakama tax, did announce this week that the state is closing the two privately operated state liquor store franchises in Wapato and Toppenish "out of respect for the Yakama Nation's desire to reduce consumption of alcohol on the reservation".
Richard Paddock owns the Wapato franchise.
He hopes to move his business to Union Gap, a few miles north and off the reservation.
Paddock said several people stand to lose their livelihoods because of the new wholesale tax, which raises the price of a six-pack of beer by about $2.40.
Restaurants and lounges could be hurt, too.
When the Yakama Tribal Council adopted the tax ordinance in November, leaders said the money would be used for alcoholism treatment and education and for drunken-driving enforcement.
"We share their concerns about alcoholism and the illegal overuse of alcohol," Locke said after meeting with tribal leaders and area mayors.
However, he said the tax is "the wrong way to go" in trying to fight problems such as chronic alcohol abuse, teen-age drinking and fetal alcohol syndrome.
State Attorney General Christine Gregoire has said the tax may be illegal because it is imposed on non-tribal members.
Tribal Council Chairman Lonnie Selam, however, said he believed the tax would withstand legal challenge.
The governor said negotiations over the issue will continue and urged businesses to hang on.
At least one of three private clubs is considering allowing members to bring in their own liquor, and then charging them a fee for glasses and mixers.
At the Double D Saloon and several other businesses, petitions are being circulated urging Locke to fight the tax.
David Meyers, owner of The 88-Cent Store across the street from the Double D, doesn't sell alcohol but he's opposed to the tax.
"I believe it's too radical, and that Toppenish residents will end up going out of town to buy their alcohol, thus causing major problems with drinking and driving," he said.
Esther Serna, who owns the El Paso Cafe, said she was neutral on the tax.
"I don't sell a lot of beer," she said.
"But I do feel sorry for the people (it) will make go out of business."
CHICAGO _ A tiny Indian tribe in a sparse slice of northeastern Nebraska found itself Friday at the forefront of an increasingly heated national debate over the matter of where tribal sovereignty ends and state control begins.
The issue was the tribe's operation of a shoe-box casino on its reservation.
Friday that little casino nearly led a U.S.
District Court judge in Omaha, Neb.
, to take an unprecedented step: the jailing of tribal leaders in a clash over reservation gambling.
Although the judge, William Cambridge, ultimately decided against jailing the leaders now, the tribe hardly won a conclusive victory.
Cambridge suggested that federal prosecutors might want to pursue a criminal rather than civil case against them, and declared once more, as he had repeatedly, that the casino was illegal because it had lacked state approval ever since opening 3 1/2 years ago.
The lack of such approval violates a federal law, the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act of 1988, which requires an Indian tribe to strike an accord, or compact, with the state in which its reservation lies if it wants to open a casino.
There are now about 145 such compacts between states and various tribes.
But Nebraska, opposing any casinos within its borders, has refused to negotiate one with the Santee Sioux, the tribe with a stake in the proceeding Friday.
That proceeding was the latest in a series of recent skirmishes over the rights of tribes to operate casinos in states from Florida to California and, more broadly, over the ability of tribes to be exempt from state regulation and taxation.
(BEGIN OPTIONAL TRIM) Only Monday, the California Supreme Court overturned a ballot measure that would have allowed expansion of legalized gambling on Indian reservations.
The decision dealt a severe blow to tribes' ambitions to build a gambling mecca to compete with Las Vegas.
The tribes' position was supported by Gov.
Gray Davis, but the court ruled that it conflicted with the state constitution's ban on casino-style games like blackjack and 21.
In addition, Florida, Kansas and Alabama, trying to block the opening of Indian casinos within their borders, have sued the U.S.
Interior Department with the aim of overturning new rules that allow the federal government to license tribal casinos in cases where states are reluctant to negotiate compacts.
And Wisconsin Gov.
Tommy Thompson refused to renew one-year gambling agreements with that state's 11 tribes until they agreed to pay $22 million in lieu of taxes, up from $350,000 under the old one-year agreements.
``Before, when we didn't have any pie, nobody bothered with us,'' said Sheila Morago, a spokeswoman for the National Indian Gaming Association.
``Now that we have a small piece of the pie, they want our filling.
It's just a constant intrusion on the treaties that were signed long ago, on the tribes' sovereign rights.
Every time you get a little farther, you take one step forward and two steps back''.
(END OPTIONAL TRIM) David Rocchio, deputy legal counsel to Vermont Gov.
Howard Dean, who has been involved in discussions on Indian gambling through the National Governors' Association, said that ``the concern that governors have is not with the benefit casinos bring to tribes''.
Rather, Rocchio said, ``the concern is with the carve-out from state regulation, such as land use, police power and other ancillary concerns that arise when tribes have casinos _ and the impact on the residents not only on the tribal lands but also on other lands in the state''.
Like gambling venues everywhere, casinos attract crime, and can prey on compulsive gamblers.
The reservation of the Santee Sioux, the tribe involved in the court showdown in Nebraska on Friday, lies on the Missouri River just across the border with South Dakota, and is home to about 1,000 tribal members.
In February 1996, the Santee Sioux opened the Ohiya Casino on reservation land, in a metal building not much bigger than a 7-Eleven store.
It has 71 video gambling and slot machines, and attracts mostly elderly people from nearby farming communities.
It takes in just $900,000 or so a year and employs only 23 people, but tribal leaders say it is an economic godsend for a reservation with 74 percent unemployment.
Tribe chairman Arthur Denny said the casino actually supports about four relatives of each employee and has brought a decline in alcohol abuse and domestic violence.
But Nebraska, which does not allow casino gambling anywhere in the state, has refused to negotiate a compact with the Santee Sioux.
Almost from the beginning, the U.S. attorney's office in Omaha has tried to get the casino shut down.
A federal appeals court found the casino illegal in 1998, and the Supreme Court, without comment, let that ruling stand.
This February, Cambridge began fining the tribe $3,000 a day, and in June he doubled the fine, to $6,000 a day.
None of the debt, now totaling $726,000, has been paid by the Santee Sioux, and the purpose of the hearing Friday was for Cambridge to consider whether to put the 11 members of the tribal council in jail for contempt.
In the end, he decided against doing so, saying that because the tribe voted in a referendum this month to keep the casino open, the leaders no longer had the authority to close it.
He told the federal prosecutors that to get the casino closed, they would have to pursue the case as a criminal matter, not a civil one.
Why that would make any difference in a practical sense was not entirely clear.
In any event, the judge was hardly sympathetic to the Santee Sioux, saying the fines would continue.
It was not certain where the case would proceed from here.
U.S. Attorney Thomas Monaghan said his office had several options, but he would not elaborate.
(STORY CAN END HERE.
OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS) After the hearing, tribal members who had made the 160-mile trip to Omaha erupted in cheers and sang tribal songs, celebrating the judge's decision not to jail the leaders.
The tribe is hoping that the new Interior Department rules will allow it to work out a legitimate means of running the casino, but that process, even if successful, could take years.
``We're not trying to break anybody's laws,'' said Thelma Thomas, the casino's manager.
``We're just trying to make life better for our people.''
American Indians are the victims of violent crimes at more than twice the national average and, unlike the situation among whites and blacks where the large majority of crime victims are of the same race as the perpetrators, 70 percent of those committing crimes against Indians are of a different race, according to the first comprehensive study of crimes involving Indians, which was released Sunday by the Justice Department.
The study found that the nation's 2.3 million Indians were far more likely to be victims of violent crimes than members of any other racial group, and that the rate of violent crime experienced by Indian women is nearly 50 percent higher than that by black males.
A full 60 percent of the perpetrators of violent crimes against Indians were whites, according to the victims, while 29 percent of the offenders were other Indians and 10 percent were described as black, the report said.
By contrast, other studies have shown that 69 percent of the perpetrators of violent crimes against whites are also white, and 81 percent of those committing violent crimes against blacks are themselves black.
``This highlights what has been going on out there for 130 years, since the beginning of the reservation system,'' said Sidney Harring, a professor of law at the City University of New York School of Law and an expert on Indian crime and criminal law.
Harring said much of the violence against Indians by other racial groups was attributable to racism and alcohol, ``with Indians being victimized by poor, drunken whites, people on the margins hurting each other''.
There are still high levels of prejudice against Indians in the West, where most Indians live, he said, and a culture that lives on the edges of Indian reservations ``that tolerates this violence,'' even among law enforcement officials.
Suzan Shown Harjo, president of the Morning Star Institute, an Indians' rights advocacy group in Washington, took an even more sweeping position, saying, ``This may actually represent a downturn in violence over the centuries since we first encountered Europeans.
``At least it's not genocidal,'' said Ms.
Harjo, who is part Cheyenee and part Muscogee.
``Now they are taking Indians out one by one''.
The study was published by the Bureau of Justice Statistics, the statistical branch of the Justice Department, using data gathered from 1992 to 1996 by the National Crime Victimization Survey, which asks a sample of American households each year about crimes they have experienced.
The survey measures the violent crimes of rape, robbery, aggravated assault and simple assault.
To supplement the survey, the justice department added data on homicides gathered by the FBI from local police reports.
The victimization survey is considered a reliable measure of crime by criminologists.
According to the survey, the average annual rate at which Indians were victims of crimes _ 124 per 1,000 people, ages 12 or older _ is about two and a half times the national average of 50 crimes per 1,000 people who are above the age of 12.
The average for whites was 49 per 1,000 people; for blacks, 61 per 1,000; and for Asians, 29 per 1,000.
Alcohol played a major part in violent crimes against Indians, both those committed by Indians against each other and those committed by people of other racial groups, the report found.
Indian victims reported that the perpetrator had been drinking in 46 percent of violent crimes against them, the highest of any racial group, while 70 percent of Indians convicted of violence who were in jail said they had been drinking at the time of their offense.
In addition, the survey found that the arrest rate for alcohol-related offenses among Indians (including drunken driving, liquor law violations and public drunkenness) was more than double that for the total population during 1996, though the arrest rate for drug offenses was lower than for other races.
The four states with the most Indian residents were; Oklahoma, with 252,000, followed by California, Arizona and New Mexico.
Peter Iverson, a professor of history at Arizona State University, said that there had been a significant shift in Indian population over the past 20 years, with a majority of Indians now living in urban areas.
But those Indians in cities form a small part of the metropolitan area and do not live in segregated areas, so they are much more likely to come in contact with people of other groups.
Residential segregation is often part of the explanation for the tendency of whites to commit violence against whites, and blacks against other blacks.
Iverson said that in rural areas bordering Indian reservations, ``you still have significant prejudice against Indian people providing traditional justification for violence''.
Historically, he said, Indians entered these communities to shop, or to buy alcohol or for entertainment, and though whites in these towns made money off the Indians, ``there has long been an uneasy relationship, even resentment''.
In this situation, arguments, fueled by alcohol, could quickly become violent, he said.
Separately, the report said that the murder rate by Indians in 1996 was 4 per 100,000, below the national average of 7.9 per 100,000, and less than the white rate of 4.9 per 100,000.
From 1991 to 1996, the murder rate by Indians fell 20 percent, faster than the overall national decline of 15 percent.
WASHINGTON (AP) --They come into Elaine Newton's court by the dozens, charged with underage drinking, using marijuana, fighting.
Some are as young as 11.
They are children without a childhood, being sucked into the vortex of drinking and despair that destroys too many people on Colorado's remote Southern Ute Indian reservation.
Newton, the tribe's chief judge, sees more of them every year.
Many, Newton said, are victims themselves, either of abuse or what she calls ''emotional incest''.
''That's where children basically are left to feel responsible for their parents' own emotional needs,'' Newton said.
''They feel it's their fault that mom is drinking or dad leaves, when it's really not their fault.
''I think we forget they are children''.
As crime rates fall nationwide, they are rising in American Indian communities, especially among the 43 percent of Indians under age 20.
Indian youth are far more likely to be arrested for alcohol-related crimes than their non-Indian counterparts, according to a report released Thursday by a government advisory panel.
The Coalition for Juvenile Justice report said 3 percent of juveniles arrested for liquor law violations are Indian, though Indians make up just 1 percent of all juveniles.
The coalition, a nonprofit group of state advisory boards created under a federal juvenile justice law, recommends expanding programs to fight Indian alcoholism, depression and gangs.
''In states with significant American Indian communities, American Indian youth are found far too frequently in the back of squad cars, rather than in the front of classrooms,'' the report said.
Juvenile crime is one strand in the web of social problems facing urban and reservation Indian communities, the report said.
High reservation unemployment is one factor.
''There are limited opportunities on the reservation, especially those in rural areas,'' said Kevin Shendoe, a member of New Mexico's Jemez Pueblo who started a group to help youths develop leadership skills.
''Given that and the history of alcoholism and poverty, I think it all plays into students getting depressed and frustrated --and in certain serious cases, violent''.
Another factor is abuse passed down from generation to generation, often starting with Indian children forced into government or religious boarding schools where tribal culture was suppressed and abuse and neglect were commonplace.
''Cultural oppression has taken a heavy toll on Native Americans for years,'' Newton said.
''There's been a lack of parenting because of boarding schools.
Parents don't know how to be parents.
... In society today, you're in between two cultures.
They lost their Indian culture and they're struggling with trying to figure out where they fit''.
Indians have some of the worst health care and highest death rates from alcoholism, diabetes, accidents and suicide in the nation.
That means many young Indians are repeatedly traumatized by deaths of friends and relatives, said Sandi Ernst, a psychologist who ran the White Mountain Apache Tribe's child mental health programs from 1993 to 1999.
A large number of children affected by alcohol in their mothers' wombs also contributes to the crime problem, said Ernst, who now practices in Phoenix.
People exposed to alcohol in the womb are more impulsive and often cannot understand consequences of their behavior, she said.
''That increases the likelihood they're going to do stupid things,'' Ernst said.
Tribal programs, which must rely on federal funding, are too often shortchanged, the report said.
Newton said getting enough money to help the children she sentences is a constant problem.
Children who have enough Indian heritage to qualify for some federal programs but are not enrolled members of the tribe often fall through the cracks, she said.
''It often seems like there's no funding available to help us,'' Newton said.
''If we need treatment for sexual abuse or domestic violence or alcohol treatment, there's no one to help us.
It's kind of like these problems never get resolved''.
Newton also thinks that Indian communities must take responsibility for ending the cycle of abuse and alcohol.
''A lot of us are in denial about what has happened,'' Newton said.
''We cover up things or say nothing's wrong in our families.
We don't make our families accountable for the wrongs we may have done.
''My sense is we need to validate what has happened, grieve and then move on.
Until you can do that, you just don't resolve anything''.
----- On the Net: Bureau of Indian Affairs: http://www.doi.gov/bureau-indian-affairs.html
ALBUQUERQUE, N.M.
(AP) --At Mesa Elementary School in far northwest New Mexico, Navajo children line up to use the few computers connected to the Internet.
Their time online must be short for everyone to get a chance.
''The Internet's not really available to me,'' said sixth-grader Altie Altieyazzie.
President Clinton was scheduled to visit the youngster's community of Shiprock on Monday as part of his New Markets Initiative to encourage economic development in depressed areas, a tour that focuses on the so-called ''digital divide'' that is leaving minority communities like Altie's behind.
Many in Shiprock hope Clinton's presence will spotlight conditions on the Navajo reservation that have kept most of its 8,000 residents from participating in the Internet information age.
Poverty and the extremely rural nature of the sprawling reservation mean many homes don't have telephone connections, let alone computers.
''We have a lot of needs, on any Native American reservation, and the Navajo Reservation is the same,'' said sixth-grade teacher Fannie L.
Atcitty. ''We're still behind, which is affecting our schools, our students''.
Officials at Mesa Elementary estimate that fewer than half of the families with children who attend the school have phone lines to their homes, a problem for emergencies as well as Internet access.
Altie, 12, said his family has a phone but no computer.
''For some people it's probably too expensive,'' he said.
The students have access to the school's computers on some days after classes, but many have long bus rides home and can't stay, said Principal Glojean Todacheene.
The limited time they get in school on the computers doesn't allow them to get comfortable enough to be considered computer literate, Atcitty said.
''Every child should be computer literate,'' she said, ''but it's not really happening here''.
There has been some progress over the past few months.
Tachyon Inc.
, a California-based company that provides wireless Internet service, gave the Lake Valley Navajo School a $30,000 satellite system last week to connect the school's computers to the Internet.
School officials tried accessing the Internet by telephone line, but the connection was so poor it took as long as 40 minutes to find a Web site.
The Bureau of Indian Affairs hopes to eventually get satellite systems to all remote schools in the Navajo Nation.
A donation earlier this year from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, started by the founder of Microsoft, created a program to provide grants for computers and software for American Indian tribes in New Mexico, Arizona, Colorado and Utah.
A computer that is expected to be delivered to the Navajo Nation's Hogback chapter in August will be used by everyone from elementary school students to business people, said Anita Hayes, community services coordinator for the chapter, about four miles east of Shiprock.
Hayes said the Internet connection will provide information on jobs, education and other opportunities to members, and she hopes Clinton's visit will make it easier to get grants for more equipment.
''There are a lot of reasons to have this access,'' she said, though not everyone is racing toward the Internet age.
''Among the elderly, it's foreign to them,'' Hayes said.
''They're not saying too much about it.
They're just observing, watching the children''.
Clinton's plans Monday including speaking at Shiprock Boys/Girls Club, then joining an evening Webcast at Dine Tribal College in Shiprock that will involve high school student online at Lake Valley Navajo School, about 55 miles away.
----- On the Net: Navajo Nation: http://www.navajo.org/nnhomepg.html
MACY, Neb.
_ There was no Christmas vacation this year at the Omaha Nation Public School, and no spring break either.
Instead, the superintendent, Todd Chessmore, decided to front load the school calendar so classes would end a few weeks early, the first week of May.
This was his attempt to stem a chronically high truancy rate that gets worse in the spring, when warmer weather and the end of the high school basketball season dampen students' interest in school.
It was not entirely successful.
In the math class taught by Chessmore, for example, only five of the 36 registered students were showing up by mid-April.
Even in a country used to stories about struggling public schools, many of those in Indian country stand out.
Last year, the average student at the Omaha Nation Public School scored in the 15th percentile on national standardized tests, and almost half scored below the 10th percentile.
Fewer than half the students in grades three through 12 came to take the test, Chessmore said.
And while this year's graduating class of nine is bigger than those of a few years ago, it represents only a third of the 27 students enrolled in that class in ninth grade.
The obstacles the Omaha Nation school wrestles with are echoed in Indian schools around the country.
On average, 36 percent to 51 percent of Indian students drop out of high school, according to the American Indian College Fund, the largest dropout rate of any ethnic group.
Only about 17 percent of high school graduates go to college, and most do not finish.
``We got the worst of everything, the lowest test scores, lowest rate of reading books, the highest dropout rate, the lowest rate of entering college,'' said Dean Chavers, director of the Native American Scholarship Fund.
``Whatever test you're looking at, Indian kids in high school typically score at the 15th or 20th percentile.
The reading of those kids is absolutely nonexistent.
Our Indian kids are leaving high school now with Algebra 1 _ no geometry, no trig _ and people wonder why they're failing out of college''.
Frustrated by years of distressing results, schools and groups like the National Indian Education Association have begun pressing states and the federal government for more money for academics and crumbling buildings, programs to train Indian teachers, and support for parents whose poverty, substance abuse or unemployment leave them unmotivated or unable to help their children stay in school and achieve.
The effort reflects the Indians' increasing ability to assert itself, as Indian leaders have gained political and legal savvy and a degree of economic empowerment through reservation casinos.
But it also reflects the critical state of Indian education.
Some reservation schools have done well and others, including the Omaha Nation school, have improved from a few years ago.
But many are dealing with a cycle of low expectations from non-Indian teachers, a generation of poorly educated parents, broken and overwhelmed families, a society historically suspicious of government-run schools and a culture that may not always see the relationship between being academically rigorous and being successful on the reservation.
These difficulties only compound the isolation and poverty of reservation life.
``I worry about the future of the tribe,'' said Denine Parker, an Omaha tribe member who teaches art at the school in Macy, where 60 percent of the 3,400 tribe members are unemployed.
``I see too many kids not getting an education.
What happens to them?
All you have to do is walk Main Street and then you know''.
To some degree, state and federal officials are responding.
President Clinton's budget request this year includes the largest increase ever for Indian education, economic and social programs _ $1.2 billion _ which would put it at $9.4 billion in 2001.
The Education Department just created an Indian Teacher Corps to train 1,000 Indian teachers.
Currently, most teachers in reservation schools are non-Indian, the turnover rates are extremely high, and many believe the teachers do not understand Indian culture and learning styles.
And in August, a task force Clinton created will present plans to improve education of the nation's 600,000 Indian students, 90 percent of whom are in public schools, many on reservations.
``What's important is that what the government is doing says it's OK to be an Indian,'' said David Cournoyer, director of external affairs for the American Indian College Fund.
``Before the philosophy was to take the Indian out of the Indian and basically educate him to be a white person.
Now there's a recognition that the Indian's background and identity and self-esteem is important to them being good students''.
Dr. David Beaulieu, the Education Department's director of Indian education, called the effort unprecedented.
``We have schools that are literally falling down around the heads of Indian children,'' Beaulieu said.
``In the 1990s we had the same high levels of dropout rates and low achievement levels as existed 20 years before''.
(BEGIN OPTIONAL TRIM) In Nebraska, the efforts of Chessmore and others got the state to hold an Indian education summit meeting and appoint a task force to improve state policy.
The Legislature passed a bill this session changing the state aid formula so tribes, which have very little taxable property, would no longer lose state financing because they cannot raise the required amount from property taxes.
The bill was vetoed by Nebraska's governor, and the Omaha Nation and Winnebago school districts plan to sue the state.
Chris Peterson, a spokesman for Gov.
Mike Johanns, said that while the governor objected to the cost and form of the bill, he also believed ``it is time for the state and federal government to step up and do more, specifically in the area of funding''.
And Nebraska's education commissioner, Doug Christensen, is hiring two staff members solely for Indian students: an education expert and a drug and alcohol counselor.
``We're really courting disaster, I think, on those reservation communities,'' said Christensen.
``In two of our reservation schools there are 44 kindergartners but only two seniors, and in one case those two kids should not be graduating.
They are two 18-year-old girls who couldn't pass the Algebra 1 test to save their soul''.
Bob Geist, principal of the Winnebago reservation school, north of Macy, said ``some parents see formal education as important, others see just being with the family as education.
We have parents who will take kids out of school just to go shopping, or schedule a haircut in the middle of the day''.
(END OPTIONAL TRIM) nn &UR; &QL; &LR; Parker, the Omaha Nation teacher who regularly sees only 15 out of 26 students in her largest class, sent her daughter to sixth grade at a non-Indian school in Iowa.
Recently, her daughter returned to Omaha Nation school to find she was ``way ahead of the sixth graders here,'' Parker said.
``If I never would have sent her away, she never would have realized how hard she has to work''.
Still, at Omaha Nation, Chessmore has made many improvements, from replacing 300 burned-out light bulbs when he started as superintendent three years ago to opening a day care center to help girls who have babies stay in school.
He started a training program for Indian teachers that will increase their numbers from 4 to 20, made the curriculum more culturally relevant, and has applied for money for a social services center with probation officers and a mental health counselor.
He received a grant for a reading program for elementary students, which has produced ``fourth graders who are reading better than half our high school''.
And he is lobbying the telephone company to give phones to the 30 percent of students' families without them.
To build trust, Chessmore, unlike most superintendents and teachers in reservation schools, enrolled his seven children at Omaha Nation, the only non-Indians among the 470 students.
He and his wife also raise four Indian students from troubled families.
He hired three truant officers, and the truancy rate fell from 31 percent to about 15 percent.
One afternoon, Waylon Oldman, a truant officer and tribe member, scoured Macy for two kindergartners who had left school.
In a Buick with its windshield cracked by rock-throwing truants, Oldman visited one boy's father and the trailer where the other boy lived with his grandmother.
He scaled a chalky ridge called Million Dollar Hill, poked in an abandoned cellar shrouded by trees, scrambled down a deep ravine under a bridge, and combed an algae-choked creek strewn with old tires..
The truants were nowhere to be seen.
``The kids are smart _ they arrange tree branches so they can scoot underneath but we have to work to get through,'' Oldman said.
He said tribal court has begun fining parents whose children were chronically truant, and the school sometimes tried to get their welfare benefits cut.
``Some parents are really concerned, but some of the parents don't really understand why they need to send the kids to school''.
One chronic truant was Janice &UR; &LR; Baxter's 16-year-old son.
She would take him to school in the morning, but said that ``in the afternoon, I would see him walking around with friends''.
Baxter said he kept ``coming home drunk'' and she sent him to a treatment center.
Some students show promise but don't follow through.
This year, it looked like Jason Miller, a senior on the basketball team, would graduate, but he stopped doing schoolwork when basketball season ended.
``I didn't really want to come to school no more,'' said Jason, 18.
But there have been successes.
One senior, Liz Parker, had slacked off too badly to graduate.
But a few weeks ago, Chessmore refused to let his daughter double date with her to the prom unless Liz did enough work to graduate.
She did.
And Adrienne Miller, 19, who was left back in ninth grade and was drinking so much last year she dropped out for two weeks, turned things around under pressure from her mother, who told her she would have to help pay the bills if she wasn't in school.
Now she'll graduate and plans to attend college.
``I finally realized what I should be doing,'' Adrienne wrote in a class essay, ``getting my education.''
SEATTLE _ The national dairy industry is using Mark McGwire to promote the health benefits of drinking milk.
Meanwhile, a rebel sneaker company called And1 has signed Latrell Sprewell to promote the misguided notion that it is OK to do whatever you want, including choke your coach, and you'll still be glorified.
The sports images in advertising are certainly eye-opening these days, even with Dennis Rodman out of the picture.
Let's start with McGwire.
The other day while driving on Aurora Avenue through Seattle, I was twice stopped at a red light long enough to realize how crazy it was to have McGwire towering over the road, his image plastered on a billboard _ bat in hand, sleeveless shirt revealing his sapling-sized biceps _ a veritable poster-boy for the health benefits of drinking milk.
Milk mustache in full view, McGwire's pitch (which you can find on the Web at www.whymilk.com) is simple: ``Going, going, gone.
Time for milk.
It's got stuff leading sports drinks don't _ like protein, potassium and calcium.
That's why I always have an ice cold glass...
as soon as I get home''.
Which prompts any rational sports fan to pose the next logical question: Does McGwire drink the milk before or after he pops the steroid-producing substance androstenedione?
He may have clobbered Maris and Ruth and ignited an entire summer, but McGwire stands for something else, too.
Ever since McGwire's andro use became public knowledge during last season's great home-run chase, McGwire has been generally unabashed in admitting his andro use.
He says it ensures better workouts in order for him to pump up his massive body, which in turn probably allowed McGwire to have one of his most injury-free seasons in the dramatic 1998.
Despite all the incredibly generous things McGwire has done for abused kids and for the game of baseball, his blind spot and failing on this issue is significant.
In Washington, D.C., earlier this month, President Bill Clinton's drug policy advisor, Gen.
Barry R.
McCaffrey, called for the federal government to study the health effects of androstenedione.
The over-the-counter supplement's popularity soared last year, even among school-aged children, soon after McGwire acknowledged using the substance for at least one year as part of his training regimen.
In an article he wrote for The New York Times last Sunday, former Olympic hurdler Edwin Moses said he supports McCaffrey's leadership on this issue.
And Moses was not afraid to point the finger at McGwire.
``Androstenedione, better known as andro, is a steroid.
Despite all the misinformation to the contrary, it is neither merely a food supplement nor is it innocuous,'' Moses said.
A long-standing anti-doping crusader, Moses is alarmed at the influence athletes like McGwire have over the behavior of children.
``The National Institute of Drug Abuse estimates that 175,000 teenage girls and 325,000 teen-age boys _ that's 500,000 children _ have reported using steroids during the past year,'' Moses said.
``The alarming numbers are not the only story.
Drug use in sport is also a fraud on the public, which is promised a product _ clean competition _ that is not ultimately delivered ...
``The problem of drug use by elite athletes must continue to be addressed on the federal level by General McCaffrey and others who are responsible for children and public welfare,'' Moses said.
Milk mustaches are one thing, but the taint of andro use still lingers with McGwire, whose bat speed and ability made him a natural anyway to set a new standard for home runs.
What might have been unnatural were McGwire's workouts, aided by the quick-recovery time andro allowed his muscles.
That is what makes you look up at McGwire's billboard and his innocent milk mustache and wish like heck the guy had simply depended on the natural goodness of milk, not the controversial substance now under serious scrutiny.
On a different front, a similar sort of head-scratching took place this NBA playoff season.
It happened when I looked into Latrell Sprewell's eyes during his ill-advised sneaker ad _ the one that is set to air 200 times before the NBA Finals.
Sprewell, who was suspended by the NBA for most of the 1997-98 season and who later sued everyone from the league to his agent to Converse sneakers because of his physical assault of Golden State coach P.J.
Carlesimo, was certainly aware that his new ad was made to shock.
``People say I'm what's wrong with sports.
I say I'm a three-time NBA All-Star.
People say I'm America's worst nightmare.
I say I'm the American dream,'' the sneering Spree says into the camera close-up.
The new ad was predicted by the national trade magazine Brandweek to be the most controversial sneaker endorsement since Nike made Charles Barkley say he was no role model.
Well, turns out Spree's ad isn't controversial.
It's just pathetic, which is what happens when you don't know any better than to go ahead and send the wrong message.
Laura Vecsey is a P-I columnist .
NEW YORK _ In 1970, two years into the open-tennis era and two years before Title IX, a pair of relatively obscure female players walked around the West Side Tennis Club in Forest Hills with a questionnaire.
Their objective: to determine tennis trends and, in particular, whether spectators attending the U.S.
Open would pay to watch a tournament with only female players.
The remarkably positive response of that informal survey by Ceci Martinez and Esme Emanuel was a declaration of independence for women's sports.
And if Title IX became the bill of rights for female athletes, this summer has emerged as the exclamation point for any equal-rights amendment.
From Women's World Cup soccer to U.S.
Open tennis, from the world track and field championships to the Pan-Pacific swimming meet, the message has been unmistakably clear: Women can hold their own on any stage, with or without men.
Teresa Weatherspoon's game-winning shot in the Women's National Basketball Association finals last week was as mind-boggling and riveting as was Jerry West's dramatic heave decades earlier.
And the Houston Comets' three-peat earned them a legacy alongside other basketball dynasties.
But the women have also stolen the show.
Even minus Steffi Graf's majestic presence and Anna Kournikova's photogenic tease, Martina Hingis, Monica Seles, Venus and Serena Williams, Lindsay Davenport, Jennifer Capriati and others have created enough competitive subplots to justify an equal-pay mantra.
Davenport's bold backhand winner against Mary Pierce from match point down in their compelling quarterfinal three-setter was the gutsy shot of the tournament.
The notion that the women must play best-of-five sets to earn singles parity at Grand Slam events (not so at the U.S.
Open, which is the only equal-opportunity employer) is as outmoded as trying to equate the price of a Broadway show ticket to the length of a performance.
Substance always prevails over style (as Andre Agassi has learned), even if you need personalities for box-office bait.
Thirty years ago, only Billie Jean King, Arthur Ashe and a handful of others understood what really mattered.
Now the Williams sisters have rewritten the rules of the road for junior tennis, and Jong Song Ok's victory for North Korea in the women's marathon at the world track championships may have opened yet another door into a closed society just as Tegla Loroupe brought African women out of obscurity with her New York City Marathon victories.
Even Brandi Chastain's celebrated stripdown at the Women's World Cup final will be analyzed by the Associated Press Sports Editors in a newsletter.
Ceci Martinez says she is fascinated by the current crop of female athletes.
``We players were unhappy with the status quo,'' she said the other day by phone from her home in San Mateo, Calif.
, where she works in real estate.
``And like all reformers, we were considered radical in our time, chided for our feminist views simply because we wanted equal opportunity in all its ramifications''.
The positive results of that study, coupled with an early sponsorship commitment from Philip Morris, gave women's tennis its first financial cushion.
Now sponsors are using today's pros and even a former great, Althea Gibson, to sell themselves and this year's Open.
But the bright lights have also brought murkier, less romantic overtones to women's sports.
At the world track championships in Spain, Merlene Ottey of Jamaica, a 39-year-old sprinter who had won 14 medals during a venerable career, was forced to withdraw from the meet after traces of the banned steroid nandrolone were found in one of her urine samples.
And lost amid the flurry of world swim records set by South African Penny Heyns at the Pan-Pacifics in Sydney's Olympic pool was her disclosure that creatine was an integral part of her training regimen.
Although legal as a nutritional supplement, creatine has been associated with bulking up male bodies for football, baseball and the beach more than female swimmers.
``I'd be swimming pretty well whether I was on it or not,'' said Heyns, who set an astonishing seven world records in her last 10 races.
``But I have the attitude that I don't want to get on the blocks during my career and know that I`ve trained and swum as hard as I could but that there was a nutritional side that I didn't do the best I could in.
I want to cover all the bases''.
These words are a far cry from the days when pasta, carbo-loading and electrolyte solutions were considered new-age nutritional training tools.
But Heyns' times will almost certainly resonate around the world on the road to Sydney next September just as many coaches have finally moved beyond East Germany's systematic steroid scandal of the '70s.
Free from current doping control procedures, nutritional supplements and doping may replace equality as the next battle ground for women.
``Title IX has certainly helped,'' Martinez said, of what awaits women, ``but looking beyond the sports arena, women are still struggling to break through the glass ceiling in all facets of life, especially in business, politics and the mass media.''
SYDNEY, September 28 (Xinhua) --Russian 400-meter runner Svetlana Pospelova tested positive for banned drugs in an out-of- competition test, International Olympic Committee officials said Saturday.
Pospelova was found to have steroid stanozolol in her system, according to Prince Alexandre de Merode, chairman of the IOC's medical commission.
Pospelova, who won the European Cup at Gateshead, England, on July 15, was not a medalist in Sydney.
The IOC Executive Board meets on Sunday.
However since she has left the country and is not expected to compete again, the matter is expected to be turned over to the international federation to consider the case and possible sanctions.
Pospelova would be the seventh athlete to test positive at the Games, which have been enveloped in doping cases since well before the start two weeks ago.
She had already returned to Russia when the medical commission received the drug test result, de Merode said.
Full details will be available after the IOC executive board meeting.
BOSTON _ Since the day she sailed her way into this city's heart by finishing a sparkling second in the 1990 Boston Marathon, her US debut after leaving East Germany, marathoning brought Uta Pippig little but joy and success.
Even the setbacks _ the worst being forced to drop out of the 1996 Olympics with a leg injury _ seemed temporary, a brief chop on life's ocean that soon would calm again as Pippig resumed her voyage toward immortality in the sport.
After all, how could anything swamp an athlete who earned her third straight Boston Marathon victory, as she did at the 100th running in 1996, by coming from nowhere in the last miles while suffering from stomach cramps and relentless diarrhea?
Then, last October, the 33-year-old Pippig was suspended by the German athletic federation for failing a routine out-of-competition drug test.
Unable to compete during the suspension and facing a two-year ban if found guilty, Pippig suddenly finds herself looking for a lifeline to save her career.
``I don't wish any person on earth this,'' said Pippig last fall, shortly after the suspension.
``I know I didn't do anything.
It's hard.
It's just not fair''.
But Pippig's forced exile from the roads hasn't kept the longtime Boston favorite out of town this weekend.
On Saturday, looking fit and relaxed, she smiled for photos at the Boston Athletic Association's annual breakfast for past champions.
Monday, as she did last year while taking what she thought would be a short break from marathoning, she will be doing television commentary for Channel 4.
Despite her uncertain situation, Pippig said recently that she was looking forward to race day.
``I can't miss it, you know,'' she said.
``It's too special''.
The same goes for the city: ``You should go where you feel supported''.
Still, she sighed, ``I wish I could run''.
Meanwhile, Pippig's contract with Nike expired in December and has not been renewed.
(``Given that she's not racing and not able to actually compete, there is no reason to sit down and discuss a contract at this point,'' said Dave Mingey, a company spokesman, who nonetheless added, ``We of course stand by Uta until her appeal process has been exhausted'').
She is paying her own legal fees, and already has lost hundreds of thousands of dollars in appearance fees and likely prize money.
And, there is no immediate end in sight.
Six months after the suspension was handed down, the commission in Germany that is investigating her case still has not set a hearing date.
If found guilty, the three-time Boston champion and two-time Olympian could be banned from competition for up to two years.
``I am very often asking my people what is going on,'' said Helmut Digel, president of the German federation, the Deutscher Leichtathletik Verband, ``because this situation is for both parties not a good one.
It is very important the period of suspension shouldn't last too long''.
The delays may be due to questions about both science and procedure.
As in the nearly three-year-old Mary Slaney case, it is unclear whether the test is even valid in women.
(Slaney was cleared by a USA Track &AMP; Field panel of a similar doping violation, and filed a lawsuit last Tuesday against the United States Olympic Committee and the International Amateur Athletic Federation, charging negligence in handling the case).
In Pippig's case, matters have been complicated by an unexplained switch in her two urine samples.
For years, rumors have swirled inside the running community about Pippig's high training mileage and rapid recovery after races; a training routine some fellow runners in Boulder, where she now lives, viewed as excessively private; and her East German background.
But until last fall, Pippig never had failed any of the dozens of drug tests in her career.
(She does acknowledge that, while still living in East Germany in 1984, she briefly took ``some kind of drug'' that her trainer told her was vitamins, but stopped within a few weeks after her parents, both physicians, investigated and told her to stop).
``I think it's kind of a sad thing,'' Pippig said of the accusations.
``But I feel sorry for them.
People who say this can be jealous''.
The test Pippig did fail, which showed an abnormal ratio of testosterone to epitestosterone in her urine, is by no means universally trusted.
The accepted ratio of testosterone, the male sex hormone, to epitestosterone, an inactive metabolite that is used as a marker, is 6 to 1; anything above that is considered to indicate the possible use of testosterone as a performance-enhancing anabolic steroid.
But because the test cannot distinguish naturally produced testosterone from ingested testosterone, even a high ratio is no guarantee an athlete has taken testosterone or androstenedione, the latter used by Mark McGwire and legal in baseball but banned by the IAAF.
At the same time, a ratio up to 10 to 1 still is considered to be in a gray area.
According to Pippig, not only was her ratio 9.2 to 1, but the abnormality was not due to high testosterone but rather to low epitestosterone, perhaps resulting from a number of conditions specific to gender and health issues that she has been battling since her epic run in 1996.
``I'm skeptical about the validity of the test, especially in women,'' said Dr.
Robert Barbieri, chief of obstetrics and gynecology at Brigham and Women's Hospital, who has sent a letter to the German federation on Pippig's behalf.
``This test has been most widely used in male athletes, and then it's been applied to females kind of by analogy.
In my mind, when we finally work out the details we will abandon it as a test for women''.
Especially in question, Barbieri believes, are the effects on the t/e ratio of oral contraceptives _ which Pippig was taking at the time _ and medical conditions involving the bowel, through which the hormones are cycled.
Pippig was hospitalized for tests after the episode during the 1996 Marathon, and said that intestinal problems, including diarrhea, and a severe hormone imbalance persisted even up to the time of the drug test last April.
``It's obvious I had a lot of problems with my intestinal tract during the last years,'' she said.
In Pippig's case, questions of procedure also have arisen.
When urine is collected for testing, samples are placed in two bottles, marked ``A'' and ``B,'' and then placed into containers also marked ``A'' and ``B''.
After her test last April 23, said Pippig, she placed the correct bottles into the matching containers herself, and then she, her coach and companion Dieter Hogen, and the test controller all signed to confirm the protocol was done correctly.
But when the ``A'' container was opened April 29 in a German laboratory, said Pippig, the ``B'' sample was found inside, leaking.
``The federation said, `It must have been you,' '' said Pippig.
``But. . . when a controller comes you do everything very clear and slow.
Six eyes who look to the same bottle, the same container, the same paper . . . '' ``There was no mistake in our home,'' insisted Hogen.
And none by the federation, insisted Digel.
``We got the information that the test was positive, and that is why we made our decision to suspend,'' he said.
``We are not responsible for the collection of the sample, not responsible for the containers, not responsible for the transportation''.
If mistakes were made in the lab, Digel said, it is the lab's responsibility, not the federation's.
Where does this leave Pippig?
``If this (the reversal of the samples and the subsequent testing of them in the wrong order, according to international rules) is fact, it would be very hard to prosecute this case,'' said Dr.
Gary I.
Wadler, an associate professor of medicine at New York University School of Medicine and lead author of the textbook ``Drugs and the Athlete''.
``If all these things can be proved, case closed''.
Yet the case is not yet closed, and so at noon Monday Pippig will be on TV rather than the starting line.
Still, she remains optimistic.
``The evidence shows I'm not guilty,'' she said.
``I will run again.
Nothing will change for me.''
WINNIPEG, Canada, August 7 (Xinhua) --The human aspect should be taken into account when dealing with the doping incident, Jose Joaquin Puello, president of the 14th Pan Am Games Organization Committee said Saturday.
At a press conference which was meant to showcase Santo Domingo of the Dominican Republic, the city to host the next Pan American Games in four years, Puello went out of his way to comment on the doping incident invovling a Dominican athlete who had won the women's high jump gold medal before testing positive at the Winnipeg Pan Am Games.
The 20-year-old high jumper Juana Rosario Arrendel was stripped of the Pan Am gold medal four days ago after she tested positive for steroid.
"Athletes are not machines.
They are human beings, and every human makes mistake, " Puello said.
"The importance is not to avoid making mistakes, but to acknowledge that you made mistakes".
Puello went on emotionally appealing the world athletics governing body, International Amateur Athletic Federation (IAAF), to be merciful when considering sanctioning Arrendel, who was called by him as "an athlete who yet to reach her summit".
"Juana should be allowed to continue her athletic life, " he said".
She is a great athlete, a great woman, completely clean in every aspect of her life".
The media also has an important role to play, he said, they should protect her instead of crucifying her.
Arrendel took what was called "Ben substance" to post a personal best jump of 1.93 meters to grab the country's sole gold medal since the beginning of the Games.
"It is painful to see such a young athlete make such a big mistake," Dr.
Eduardo de Rose, chairman of the PASO Medican Commission said.
"This is the substance Ben Johnson has taken.
It's exetremely important for us to know where she got it".
Stonozolol, which was found in Arrendel's urine sample, is an anabolic steroid to increase power in speed, especially in the competitions of high jump and 100-meter race.
Gottschalt recalled that in 1981, when she was 15, she left the swimming school and returned home to hear friends and family remark about how the little girl had developed into a muscle-bound woman with a deep voice.
Other problems ensued: liver ailments, a hardening of back muscles.
In 1984 she gave birth to a son with a clubfoot.
Gottschalt believes her baby's deformity was a result of her being given drugs.
As years passed and her anger grew, she wondered exactly what the little blue pills had contained.
``I didn't think anyone cared enough about what happened to me to take any interest,'' she said.
``I gave up thinking anything might happen''.
Hope was restored last year when Gottschalt received a call from Michael Lehner, a German lawyer who specializes in doping-related lawsuits.
Lehner brought the criminal case against Kipke, and with the public prosecutor helped try it.
Lehner represented Gottschalt in this trial, along with eight other female swimmers who, he said, also had children with birth defects.
Having read files kept by the swimming federation, Lehner learned that Gottschalt was a member of the B group of swimmers, young hopefuls who, according to the Stasi files, were to receive ``supporting means'' to improve their performance.
``Supporting means'' was code for the drug Oral-Turinabol, an anabolic steroid manufactured in East Germany.
Lehner embarked on a search for other former swimmers who had also been administered the little blue pills and who would be willing to testify.
Court cases involving doping to that point had involved only swimmers from programs in the former East Berlin.
Lehner widened the scope and found former members of teams in Magdeburg, Erfurt, Potsdam, Chemnitz, Halle, Rostock, Leipzig and Dresden who had been similarly doped.
Lehner spoke to Ute Krause, also a product of the Magdeburg program, and found that her experiences were nearly identical to Gottschalt's.
After Krause left the swimming school in 1981, her voice was deeper, she had liver problems and she battled depression.
Years later, as the administrator of a nursing home in Magdeburg, Krause learned more about Oral-Turinabol.
Certain patients were being prescribed the drug to help regain muscle loss because of illness.
In a medical textbook, she read of the link between anabolic steroids and chronic depression.
She made no additional efforts to find out more about what had happened to her until Lehner called.
``I suppressed what happened to me for so long,'' Krause said recently in Magdeburg.
``I am still searching for my biography''.
In early January, Gottschalt, 34, Krause, 37, and three other former East German swimmers were present in a Berlin courtroom for the trial of Lothar Kipke.
During his testimony, Kipke admitted that he had distributed anabolic steroids to the swimmers but contended that he was unaware that the drugs carried any adverse side effects other than a deepening of the voice.
According to Kipke, as research increased in the 1980s, he began administering the steroids in lower dosages and only in pill form.
Ten feet from Kipke, Gottschalt listened to the doctor rationalize his actions.
When she heard his lawyer explain that Kipke had only been following orders, Gottschalt exclaimed, ``Say that to my son's face''!
Daniel, her 14-year-old disabled son, sat beside her.
Krause seized the chance to address Kipke directly near the end of the trial.
``He avoided making a direct apology,'' Krause said.
Lehner called Kipke a ``monster''.
``What gives a doctor that right to treat young girls like guinea pigs''?
Lehner said.
At the end of the one-day trial, Judge Peter Faust ruled that Kipke had acted with ``willful malevolence'' in overseeing doping of the swimmers during his tenure as head doctor.
Faust gave Kipke a 15-month suspended jail sentence, the most severe doping-related punishment meted out to a former East German official.
The verdict provided little solace for Gottschalt, who had hoped that the link between doping and birth defects would be addressed at the trial.
Faust declined Lehner's motion that the women whose children had birth defects receive financial compensation.
``We are going to pursue this further,'' Lehner said.
``I am representing nine clients who gave birth to children with birth defects''.
A member of the Berlin program, Barbara Krause, who won a gold medal on the East German freestyle relay team in the 1980 Olympics, has given birth to two children with clubfeet, according to Lehner.
She has been unwilling to testify at the doping trials, however, because of her marriage to Lutz Wanja, a former swimming coach in Potsdam.
Since the Kipke trial, Lehner has learned that a former swimmer in Leipzig has a 19-year-old daughter with a clubfoot.
In the next trial, for which no date has been set, Lehner plans to refer again to evidence yielded by the Stasi files, which show that East German doctors ordered female athletes to take birth control or have abortions because they feared Oral-Turinabol could damage fetuses.
Kipke, 72, is the 26th East German sports official to be convicted on charges of doping.
They were involved in swimming as well as other sports.
In May, several months before the statute of limitations runs out on the prosecution of middle-level East German criminals, Manfred Ewald and Manfred Hoeppner will have their day in court.
Hoeppner, head doctor of the East German sports medicine service, oversaw an unofficial group that the prosecution contends was the committee for all doping programs.
Ewald, former president of the East German Athletics Association, wrote a book chronicling his control over East German sports.
Gottschalt said she would be in the courtroom once again.
And to current swimmers caught up in the latest controversy over the use of dietary supplements like creatine to improve performance, Gottschalt offers her own sobering advice.
``Just leave it,'' she said.
``It's not worth it.
Let your body perform on its own.''
BERLIN (AP) _ Two medical experts testifying Wednesday in the doping trial of a former East German sports doctor said the female swimmers they examined showed health damage linked to performance-enhancing drugs, including liver damage and excessive facial hair.
The two professors said they examined 11 swimmers, all of whom were witnesses in the trial.
Five of the women had changes in their voices, they said.
One had heavy facial hair that was either caused or worsened by taking anabolic steroids, they said.
Two women were diagnosed with liver damage, they said, and another had a liver tumor that could be traced back to taking a combination of contraceptive pills and steroids for eight years.
Such side-effects of anabolic steroids have been generally known since 1977, they said.
Horst Luebbert, a professor of clinical gynecology, cautioned, however that while the health damage was ``with all probability'' linked to doping, ``we can't offer (absolute) security''.
Luebbert and pharmacology professor Norbert Rietbrock testified in the trial against Dr.
Dieter Binus.
His case was severed from five other defendants _ four coaches and another doctor _ after he made a partial confession last month.
The six were charged with causing bodily harm by administering performance-enhancing drugs to young swimmers without informing the athletes or their parents.
Binus, 59, admitted administering anabolic steroids, but insisted in court testimony that the doses were too small to cause physical harm and that none of his athletes showed ill effects.
The next court date for his case was set for Aug.
24, when a verdict could be handed down.
The five other defendants have not made any statements.
Their trial resumes Monday.
&UR; (pfg-xx)
SYDNEY, September 13 (Xinhua) --Two positive doping tests were announced on Wednesday, just two days before the opening of the Sydney Olympic Games.
The cheaters were strongman Chen Po-pu of Chinese Taipei, and woman triple jumper Iva Prandzheva of Bulgaria.
Chen became the first athlete to be expelled from the Olympics for a positive test of methandienone, and Prandzheva tested positive for the steroid nandrolone.
Prandzheva, a silver medallist at the 1995 world championships, was caught for taking drugs at the 1996 Atlanta Olympics.
She was banned for two years for taking methandienone.
Chen, who took silver and bronze medals at world junior competitions in 1997 and 1998, had been due to compete in the 62 kg category.
BERLIN (AP) _ Germany's second doping trial against former East German sports functionaries opened Tuesday with coaches and doctors confessing they systematically administered performance-enhancing drugs to female swimmers.
All five defendants denied, however, that they knowingly damaged the health of the athletes, some of whom were as young as 12 when they started taking the pink and blue anabolic steroid pills.
Dr. Ulrich Suender, the first to take the stand, said he knew only a little about possible side-effects of steroids, and had thought they were were reversible.
``I believed that,'' he said in testimony echoed by his co-defendants.
Suender, a second doctor and three coaches are charged with causing bodily harm to as many as 17 young female swimmers on East Germany's TSC Berlin team from 1978 to 1989.
One is now sterile because her hormonal balance was disrupted by the steroids, which she started taking at 13.
Others suffered such side-effects as deeper voices, serious acne and excessive hair growth.
Prosecutors say the defendants administered the drugs _ without telling the minors or their parents what they were taking _ as part of communist East Germany's state-sponsored push to create Olympic champions.
Despite widespread suspicions raised by the unusually broad shoulders, big muscles and deep voices of some East German athletes over the years, few were ever caught in drug tests.
But since German unification, evidence of the systematic use of steroids to enhance performance has been found in once-secret East German government files.
On Tuesday, Suender, 58, testified that he had no reservations about providing anabolic steroids in pill form to the team doctors, which was part of his responsibility.
He denied ever giving steroid injections, as prosecutors have charged.
Former team doctor Dorit Roesler, 50, said she passed them on to the coaches, who admitted giving them to the swimmers.
Coaches Peter Mattonet, 48; Berndt Christochowitz, 40 and Klaus Klemenz, 55, said they assumed the pills were to improve athletic endurance.
However, Christochowitz, who now works for an insurance firm, insisted he didn't know the pills were anabolic steroids.
Former East German swimmer Karen Koenig, who is a co-plaintiff in the case, at one point asked Roesler why she never checked for ill effects from the steroids.
Roesler insisted the athletes had regular medical exams and nothing worrying was found.
Suender said only once in his 15-year career did he suspect the steroids of causing a health problem, when a girl came to him with acute liver problems.
He and the others also insisted they were sworn to secrecy about the doping, even when it came to the athletes themselves or their parents.
Because all five made statements before the court, no other witnesses were likely to be called.
A verdict could come as early as Thursday.
Although they could get up to three years in prison, the defendants were expected to receive suspended sentences or fines.
The first trial, which began March 18, involves coaches and doctors from the former communist nation's showcase Dynamo Berlin swim team.
Only one, Dr.
Dinus Bieter, has made a partial confession.
He admitted in court last month that he administered anabolic steroids to athletes, but insisted the doses were too small to cause physical harm and that no one showed ill effects.
His case was severed last week from other five _ four coaches and another doctor _ and resumes Monday, when a verdict could be handed down.
The trial for the others resumes Wednesday, but no verdict was expected.
BERLIN (AP) --East Germany's former sports chief and his medical director were convicted Tuesday for their roles in a top secret doping program in the former communist country that turned promising young female athletes into souped-up Olympic champions.
Manfred Ewald, 74, and Manfred Hoeppner, 65, were each convicted of 20 counts of being accessories to causing bodily harm for secretly administering steroids to the athletes.
The men allegedly told the athletes they were giving them vitamins.
Ewald was sentenced to 22 months probation; Hoeppner was given 18 months.
The court found them innocent of more serious charges that could have brought jail time.
Prosecutors say the 20 female athletes involved in the case suffered serious side-effects from the drugs, and that Ewald and Hoeppner knew of the potential danger.
''Those responsible have been called to account,'' said Michael Lehner, the attorney for the women.
Defense lawyers said they were considering an appeal.
A member of the communist party's central committee, Ewald was president of East Germany's sports federation from 1961-88 and of its National Olympics Committee from 1973 until the country ceased to exist in 1990.
In its verdict, the court said Ewald was the ''driving force'' behind the doping program and kept it going with ''merciless hardness''.
Hoeppner, as the country's top sports doctor, worked out the details of the doping program --including the secrecy rules -- and distributed the steroids to the sports doctors and coaches, the court found.
Both shared responsibility for the ''systematic and overall doping in (East German) competitive sports,'' from 1974 until the Berlin Wall came down in 1989, the court found.
The court said it handed down a lesser sentence to Hoeppner because he had apologized to the athletes and cooperated with prosecutors in other doping cases.
Ewald never made a direct apology.
Former track star Brigitte Michel, who was in court Tuesday, said she ''can live with'' the verdict even though the men most likely won't have to serve any time behind bars.
They faced a maximum of two years.
''There's no verdict anyway that can make up for the damage suffered,'' she said.
The athletes were seeking a conviction on a more serious charge.
They say the drugs caused them to develop excessive body hair and deep voices and also caused gynecological problems.
The baby of one former athlete was born with deformities allegedly linked to the drugs.
But the court said a direct connection could not be established between the steroids and each individual's specific illness.
The results of the steroid program were dramatic: East Germany, with fewer than 17 million people, went from 20 gold medals in 1972 to 40 in 1976.
East Germans won 11 of 13 events in women's swimming in 1976 and again in 1980.
About 20 former East German coaches, doctors and others have been convicted and given fines, suspended sentences or both.
PARIS, September 16 (Xinhua) --The International Amateur Athletic Federation (IAAF) has pressed for the national federations of Cuba and Jamaica to impose ban on high jumper Javier Sotomayor and sprinter Merlene Ottey for doping failures.
"It is a normal procedure and we do that in every doping case as soon as the B samples prove positive too, regardless of the athlete's fame or celebrity," IAAF spokesman Giorgio Reineri said.
The urge came as Cuban authorities repeatedly said they would stand by Sotomayor, the world record holder, who failed a dope test for cocaine at the Pan American Games in Winnipeg, Canada.
The athletics' world ruling body also prompted the Jamaica Amateur Athletic Association (JAAA) to take action against Ottey, whose second urine sample had just been tested positive.
The JAAA will conduct a hearing by November to determine whether it will suspend Ottey from competitions for two years.
Ottey tested positive for the steroid nandrolone at a meet in Lucerne, Switzerland in July and the IAAF disclosed Thursday that the 39-year-old sprinter's "B" sample on September 2, the second urine test, also has tested positive for the drug.
"There are international rules regarding athletes who have had positive dope tests and they should be applied by all national federations.
"But it is up to the national federation to make a decision".
said Reineri.
SYDNEY, September 20 (Xinhua) --Following is the list of competitors suspended from the Sydney Olympics for drugs offences: Olympians dropped before arrival in Sydney: Female weightlifters Chen Jui-lien and Wu Mei-yi of Chinese Taipei dropped by their team for positive tests (September 7) Canadian hammer thrower Robin Lyons dropped from team after testing positive for steroids (September 7) Czech weightlifter Zbynek Vacura dropped from team for testing positive for steroids (September 7) Bulgarian triple and long jumper Iva Prandzheva barred for positive test (September 13) German distance runner Dieter Baumann banned for two years after appeal against positive test is rejected (September 19) Olympians suspended after arrival in Games village for failing pre-Games tests: Weightlifter Chen Po-pu of Chinese Taipei expelled after testing positive for steroids (September 13) Kazakhstan swimmer Yevgeniya Yermakova barred for testing positive for drug masking agent Furosemide in May (September 13) Romania weightlifters Traian Ciharean and Adrian Mateas suspended for testing positive for steroids (September 15) Norwegian weightlifter Stian Grimseth expelled for testing positive for steroids (September 18) Iranian boxer Anosheravan Nourian expelled from Olympics after confirmation he had tested positive for banned drugs Kenyan 4x400m relay star Simon Kemboi banned for testing positive for anabolic steroids (September 19) Olympians caught doping during Sydney Games: Bulgarian 52kg weightlifting silver medallist Ivan Ivanov stripped of medal for positive for banned diuretic (September 20) Belarus hammer thrower Vadim Devyatovsky banned for tested positive for steroid nandrolone (September 20)
SYDNEY, Australia _ As yet another drug scandal struck the Olympic track and field competition on Wednesday, Marion Jones sprinted for the first time since the public announcement that her husband had tested positive for steroids, easily winning her opening heat in the 200 meters.
Minutes before Jones's heat, the gold medal favorite in the women's hammer throw was told while on the track that she was ineligible to compete because she had failed a drug test for the steroid nandrolone.
Mihaela Melinte of Romania, a two-time world champion in the hammer throw, became the seventh person suspended at the Sydney Games for failed drug tests.
She tested positive June 7 at a meet in Milan, track and field's world governing body said.
This was the third drug scandal involving Romanians in Sydney.
Tuesday, the 16-year-old gymnastics all-around champion, Adreea Raducan, was stripped of her gold medal after testing positive for the stimulant ephedrine.
Earlier, the entire Romanian weight-lifting team was expelled after two athletes had tested positive for nandrolone before the Games.
The lifters who had not tested positive were allowed back in after Romanian Olympic officials paid a $50,000 fine.
More than 50 athletes have either withdrawn before the Games or been caught during the Sydney Olympics in drug-related offenses, confirming the belief by many that the use of performance-enhancing drugs is widespread.
This morning Melinte was preparing to warm up for the hammer throw qualifying round when ``she was informed of the reason why she could not compete,'' said Giorgio Reineri, a spokesman for track and field's world governing body, known as the IAAF ``She said she didn't know''.
Nandrolone is the steroid for which the shot-putter C.
&UR; &LR; J.
Hunter, Jones's husband, tested positive for four times this summer, the IAAF said.
Hunter has said that he believed he ingested the substance from taking improperly labeled and contaminated nutritional supplements.
Jones did not refer to her husband's troubles after she won her heat of the women's 200 meters in 22.75 seconds.
She spoke only of her race, saying she was simply trying to conserve energy in the first heat because she had another round of the 200 scheduled for Wednesday night, as well as qualifying for the long jump.
Her awkward form in that event figures to be her biggest impediment to becoming the first female track and field athlete to win five gold medals in one Olympics.
``I stated all along that this day was going to be the most difficult for me because I had two heats of the 200 and the long jump,'' Jones said.
Withdrawing from the 200 was Inger Miller, the 1999 world champion and the only real threat to Jones in the event.
Miller earlier withdrew from the 100 meters, which Jones won last Saturday, after suffering a strained hamstring in training before the Sydney Games.
Miller is still hoping she can run on the American 4x100-meter relay, which is scheduled for Saturday, her agent, Emanuel Hudson, said this morning.
Craig Masback, the chief executive officer of the U.S. track and field federation, said specifically that Miller did not fail a drug test and was eligible to compete in Sydney.
Suzy Favor Hamilton had the fastest time in the preliminary heats of the women's 1,500 meters in 4 minutes 8.08 seconds and is an inviting position now to win the gold medal.
The American champion, Regina Jacobs, withdrew before the Games with a respiratory viral infection.
And on Wednesday, the defending Olympic champion at 800 and 1,500 meters, Svetlana Masterkova of Russia, did not complete her heat of the 1,500.
Masterkova has had surgery on both Achilles' tendons in the past year, and her return to form has been uncertain.
She had dropped any intention of defending her 800-meter title and she had avoided the European racing circuit as she tried to regain her fitness.
She pulled up during on Wednesday's heat and burst into tears as she hobbled off the track.
The other American entrant in the women's 1,500, Marla Runyan, struggled through the first round but qualified for the semifinals in 4:10.83.
Runyan is the first legally blind athlete to make the American team in any sport. &QL;
MADRID, February 17 (Xinhua) --Spanish pole vaulter Dana Cervantes was tested positive in August for the banned steroid nandrolone, the International Amateur Athletic Federation (IAAF) said on Wednesday.
The Spaniard tested positive at the European Championships in Budapest on August 16, an IAAF spokesman said, adding "but all the business is currently in the hands of the Spanish federation".
A source close to the Spanish federation said that there were a number of discrepancies surrounding Cervantes' positive sample.
Cervantes took the test at her own request after she was not randomly selected in the qualifying rounds of the championship where she set a Spanish national record and eventually finished 11 th in the finals.
"They (the Spanish federation) asked us to respect the athlete' s confidentiality in this case, which would have been broken if we published her name, although we have been assured by the Spanish federation that she will not compete until the case is clarified," the IAAF spokesman added.
If Cervantes' positive test is confirmed, she could be banned from the sport for two years.
SYDNEY, Australia _ Forty of China's 300 Olympic athletes have withdrawn from the Summer Games, seven of them rowers who failed blood tests at home indicating that they were using performance-enhancing drugs, Olympic officials said Wednesday.
Favored to become the host city for the 2008 Summer Games, Beijing is apparently being extremely careful to avoid another doping scandal like those that tarnished the accomplishments of its swimmers in recent years.
There has also been skepticism about the stunning achievements of China's distance runners in the early 1990s.
It was not known whether the other 33 withdrawals were related to drugs, Sydney Olympic officials stressed.
Milton Cockburn, a spokesman for the Sydney Olympic Organizing Committee, said the withdrawals came after a request that countries pare down their teams or find other housing because the 10,400 available beds could not accommodate every athlete in the Olympic village.
The withdrawal of the seven rowers appears to indicate that the implementation of blood-testing procedures for the first time at these Sydney Games is having some deterrent effect on athletes in endurance sports who may look to cheat by illicitly trying to increase their oxygen-carrying capacity.
The International Olympic Committee last week approved testing for erythropoietin, or EPO, a synthetic version of a naturally-occurring hormone that stimulates the production of red blood cells and is believed to be widely used in such endurance sports as distance running, cycling, swimming and rowing.
``People are now convinced there is a test, that the IOC is prepared to apply it and nobody wants to send athletes to the Games that are going to get caught and disgraced,'' said Dick Pound, an IOC vice president from Montreal who is head of the World Anti-Doping Agency, created by the IOC in the wake of the EPO scandal at the 1998 Tour de France.
Extensive drug use will certainly occur at the Sydney Games, IOC officials concede, considering there will be no tests for such performance-enhancers as human growth hormone, insulin growth hormone and artificial blood products.
Steroid use is also so sophisticated that topical gels can be flushed from the system in a matter of hours.
However, the EPO test may deter cheaters and encourage athletes who do not cheat that the playing field is being made more level, Pound said.
``I don't want to be too superlative, but this is a terrific sign,'' Pound said in an interview Wednesday morning.
``You end up with a double benefit''.
The IOC is conducting 2,100 out-of-competition tests in Sydney, including 300 tests for EPO.
Unannounced, out-of-competition tests are considered the only reliable way to catch cheaters.
The EPO test is a combination of a French urine test that can detect direct use of the drug for 2 or 3 days and an Australian blood test that detects indirect use.
Privately, IOC scientists say they are concerned about whether the tests will withstand legal scrutiny.
But the test can be just as valuable if it discourages athletes from using EPO for fear they might be caught, Pound said.
The Chinese rowers, who included Zhang Xiuyun, a gold medalist in the women's single scull at a World Cup race in Zurich, Switzerland, last June, were presumably subjected in China to a hematocrit test that showed high red-blood cell counts, an indirect measure of the use of EPO, Pound said.
Liu Jianyong, secretary general of the Chinese rowing federation, said the rowers had withdrawn to ``protect their health'' _ a euphemism used in drug cases _ and to ``uphold the fairness of the Olympics''.
China has publicly stated its determination to conduct more vigilant drug-testing procedures after being embarrassed repeatedly in recent years.
Unlike the former East Germany, which operated a state-sponsored system of doping, China's doping appears to be conducted largely by individual coaches, according to American coaches and drug experts.
Its female swimmers and distance runners have been far less dominant since the mid-1990s.
More than 30 Chinese swimmers were caught using drugs in the last decade, including seven at the 1994 Asian Games.
One swimmer, Yuan Yuan, was caught with 13 vials of human growth hormone, a steroid, in her luggage at the 1998 world swimming championships in Perth, Australia and four other Chinese women tested positive.
Two months ago, another female swimmer, Wu Yanyan, the world champion in the 200-meter individual medley, failed a drug test at the Chinese national championships and was banned for four years.
ATLANTA _ It's no longer a secret.
Many male athletes are supplementing their fitness techniques of chugging milk and lifting weights with performance-enhancing drugs.
The temptation also is becoming too great for some female athletes to resist.
Substances such as anabolic steroids have a more dramatic effect on them than on men, because the testosterone in their bodies gets a bigger boost.
_ According to the most recent Youth Risk Behavior Survey conducted by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2.4 percent of female high-school students acknowledged using the illegal steroids, compared with 4.9 percent of males.
_ A survey of youngsters at four Massachusetts middle schools, published this spring in the journal Pediatrics, found that 2.6 percent of girls were users, barely behind the 2.8 percent rate for boys.
_ In his book, ``The Steroids Game,'' Penn State professor Charles Yesalis estimates the use of steroids among female college athletes at 5 percent in swimming, 6 percent in basketball and 10 percent in track and field.
``When there is increased competition and more at stake,'' Yesalis said, ``potential pro outlets and potential scholarships because of Title IX, you're going to see more people willing to cheat to gain an advantage over their opponent.
``You're seeing an increased number of parents, similar with teenage boys, that get carried away.
They don't provide their kids with a moral and ethical foundation, where they know there are certain boundaries you shall not cross in pursuit of victory''.
There is no mistaking the dangers of steroids for women, with documentation provided by recent trials involving trainers and coaches from the former East German sports empire.
Heidi Krieger, 1986 European shot put champion, was given mysterious blue pills that she thought were vitamins.
She developed facial hair and a dramatically enlarged Adam's apple.
Krieger recently announced plans to sue the coaches and trainers for allegedly force-feeding her steroids without her knowledge.
Krieger had a sex-change operation and changed her first name to Andreas.
``I trusted them, but they took advantage of me,'' Krieger testified at a trial of East German officials, some of whom admitted to supplying drugs to athletes.
Some sports leaders in the former Soviet Union and, more recently, China also have incorporated steroids into building strong women's programs.
The carrot dangling in front of them is the relative newness of women's sports, which allows countries to make inroads more quickly than in men's athletics.
``We think it is easier for the women to shoot into international fame,'' said professor Tian Maijiu, vice president of the Beijing Institute of Physical Education.
Chinese officials adamantly deny existence of a state-run doping program, claiming instead that individual coaches push too hard.
The fact is that at least 23 Chinese athletes, mostly women, have tested positive for steroids since 1990.
When the Chinese women's swim team arrived in Australia for the world championships in January, customs officials uncovered 13 vials labeled ``growth hormone'' in an athlete's luggage.
Four of those swimmers were banned this summer for two years.
A case study on the striking influence of steroids on women is the East German runner Marita Koch, whose 47.60 seconds for the 400 meters in 1985 is a world mark that still stands.
It turns out that Koch had been doping with Oral-Turinabol, a testosterone-based steroid, for at least four years leading up to her record run.
``Women have relatively little (testosterone) and now, with testosterone-based anabolic steroids, you can double, triple, even increase by 10 times the amount (in their bodies),'' said Jaci Van Heest, director of exercise physiology for U.S.
Swimming. ``The bang for the buck is much greater than doing it to a guy because they already have the natural amount.
``Then, you have the huge growth in women's sports, and there are a lot of issues that make it fertile ground for any kind of cheating''.
Story Filed By Cox Newspapers For Use By Clients of the New York Times News Service
LAUSANNE, Switzerland _ When the International Olympic Committee gathers today, the debate will shift from bribery and graft to the spreading scourge of performance-enhancing drugs.
The three-day world summit on doping, a bid to squash yet another scandal that threatens to turn off corporate sponsors, follows a string of headlines since the 1996 Atlanta Olympics.
The most damaging came from the Berlin trials of former East German doctors and coaches who harrowingly detailed administering male hormones to young female athletes _ none of whom tested positive in subsequent Olympic competitions _ and from French authorities raiding two cycling teams participating in the Tour de France race last summer and confiscating hundreds of doses of drugs.
The IOC's ethical standards have been questioned because of mounting evidence that some members might have accepted gifts in exchange for votes on Olympic bid cities.
And there is some doubt whether the doping conference is a legitimate avenue for reform or a desperate public relations stunt to cover past failings.
``You would have to be pretty rah-rah about the IOC to believe drug-testing is working,'' said Charles Yesalis, a Penn State professor and author of ``Anabolic Steroids in Sport and Exercise''.
``All of this is interwined.
The drug scandals are not separate from the bribes.
This is the modus operandi of this organization.
``It's a business, and drug use is bad for business.
So you cover it up.
You put in place a system that would hoodwink the public, hoodwink the journalists and not really catch anybody, but you can say you have a system.
The problem is, people have become wise to the PR scam''.
As Yesalis and others see it, the Olympic business is that of producing heroes and selling dreams, not exposing drug users and cheats.
Unwittingly, IOC president Juan Antonio Samaranch hammered home the point last summer with words to a Spanish newspaper he later had to retract.
Samaranch said he wanted to drop some drugs from the banned list and punish only those who took substances harmful to athletes.
He had to be reminded by Prince Alexandre de Merode, head of the IOC Medical Commission, that all of the drugs listed had harmful side effects.
Just before the 1998 Winter Olympics, Samaranch pledged $50 million for an IOC anti-doping campaign that never got off the ground.
This week, he is expected to produce plans to establish an international doping agency and to commit $25 million to anti-doping research, while attempting to bring the various sports federations together on a uniform penalty system for doping offenders.
Former IOC member Robert Helmick said if Samaranch wanted to get rid of the drug problem he would commit at least $200 million to research.
``(The conference) is basically to cover up, to divert attention,'' Helmick said.
Samaranch suggested that de Merode, who oversees the IOC's flawed system, head the new effort, raising doubts about the independence of the agency.
On Monday, such powerful sports federations as soccer (FIFA) and swimming (FINA) opposed an IOC proposal that athletes face life bans and fines of as much as up to $1 million in serious cases of ``intentional doping,'' along with selective bans for some first-time offenders.
The suspicion has lingered for years that the IOC more inclined toward a passive tolerance of doping, with a scant few athletes testing positive, rather than a drug-free Olympics.
Under the Samaranch regime, one-tenth of 1 percent of the athletes tested positive at an Olympiad.
Only two athletes flunked tests for steroids at the Atlanta Games, while the IOC ignored five other samples that were detected by their high-tech equipment and found to contain banned strength-builders.
An arbitration panel threw out the disqualifications of five other athletes who tested positive for using a stimulant.
The disputed steroid samples were tested by a device known as a high-resolution mass spectrometer, which the IOC asked Atlanta Olympic organizers to purchase just months before the Games, at $500,000 each.
De Merode said the tests were declared invalid because the newness of the equipment resulted in ``technical difficulties,'' but the decision still rankles some members of the IOC medical commission.
``The medical commitee never heard any of this,'' Arne Ljungqvist said.
``Of course, it concerns me''.
Questionable drug-testing dates back to the 1984 Games in Los Angeles.
Don Catlin, who assisted in the Atlanta lab and oversaw drug testing in LA, said that nine positive tests turned up ``missing'' after the Los Angeles Games.
Those athletes' initial ``A'' samples proved positive, but there were no tests performed on their ``B'' samples as required to ultimately confirm a positive.
The athletes were never identified.
De Merode has acknowledged that paperwork on the ``A'' tests mysteriously was removed from his room in Los Angeles at the close of the Games.
History reads that the Los Angeles Games produced 10 positive tests, not 19.
``We expected we would be doing 'B' confirmations in the ensuing months, which was the way it had been in Montreal (at the 1976 Olympics),'' Catlin said.
``That never came to pass.
Then, it came out that the codes (numbers assigned in order to conceal the athlete's identity) were somehow shredded or lost.
I don't know where they went.
All I know is there were some cases that did not go to 'B' confirmation''.
Former U.S.
Olympic track coach Pat Connolly has told a Senate judiciary committee she believes ``at least 40 percent of the (U.S).
women's team in Seoul had probably used steroids at sometime in their preparation for the Games''.
None of the Americans tested positive, but the most famous drug case did break in Seoul in 1988 _ Canadian gold-medal sprinter Ben Johnson flunking a test for steroids.
In retrospect, he often is cast not just as a cheater but someone careless enough in his drug use to get caught.
In Seoul, IOC drug testers were aware of Russian sports officials operating a drug lab in a docked ship to monitor their athletes and make sure they would not be shamed by a positive test.
Catlin, who worked in the Seoul lab, said he heard about the Russian ship near the close of the Games.
He later confirmed the story in speaking with two Russian scientists who operated the lab.
``If there is shame in it, it's why the Soviets found it necessary to have a boat to check their athletes at the last minute,'' Catlin said.
``But that is not unlike the situation being revealed during the East German trials.
They did the exact same thing, and the Soviet bloc was very sensitive to these things.
.. . ``Every country, including our own, tests athletes before leaving for the Games.
But there is a difference between the practice and what is done with the results.
If you don't do anything with the positives, and the athletes go to the Games, that is wrong''.
Even in the U.S., testing is embroiled in controversy.
The U.S.
Olympic Commitee administers its own drug-testing program rather than contracting with an independent agency.
Its own advisory panel concluded that the current arrangement is a conflict because the USOC supports the same athletes financially.
Only about half of the 150-200 athletes targeted each month for random tests wind up being checked, a USOC drug-testing official acknowledged.
Mike Fish writes for the Atlanta Journal-Constitution, Atlanta, Ga.
Story Filed By Cox Newspapers For Use By Clients of the New York Times News Service
HONG KONG, September 10 (Xinhua) --Following are Hang Seng Index (key indicator of Hong Kong's blue chips), Hang Seng China Enterprises Index, Hang Seng China-Affiliated Corporations Index and turnover on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange on Friday: Index: Friday Thursday change Hang Seng Index (HSI) 13,855 13,854 +1 HSI Sectors: Finance 20,276 20,342 -66 Utilities 16,400 16,348 +52 Properties 16,444 16,414 +30 Com/Ind 8,312 8,309 +3 Hang Seng China Enterprises Index 616 602 +14 Hang Seng China-Affiliated Corporations Index 1,174 1,155 +19 Turnover (Million HK Dollars): HSI 10,663 11,442 +779 (Million U.S.
Dollars) 1,367 1,466 +99 The data above are from Hang Seng Index Services Limited, which compiles and manages the Hang Seng Index and many other indices.
An over-the-counter supplement called ``andro,'' made popular when baseball slugger Mark McGwire admitted using it in 1998, raises testosterone and estrogen above normal levels and could be dangerous, according to a Harvard study financed by Major League Baseball and its players union.
However, hormone levels receded after its use was stopped.
The study, published in Wednesday's Journal of the American Medical Association, is the first to conclude that high doses of the steroid hormone can elevate testosterone levels.
However, the trial lasted just one week, and did not measure whether the dietary supplement can do what its producers say it can: increase muscle size and mass.
Nor did the study conclude whether the supplement has long-term side effects.
Androstenedione is naturally produced in both men and women, and converts to either testosterone or to an estrogen.
Testosterone is the body's major muscle builder.
The pill, legal and sold over-the-counter, is banned by the International Olympic Committee, the National Football League and the National Collegiate Athletic Association.
Major League Baseball, the National Basketball Association, and the National Hockey League has no restriction regarding its use.
Little is known about andro, which became available in the United States several years ago even though it was developed in the 1970s by the East Germans to enhance their athletes' Olympic performance.
Dr. Benjamin Z.
Leder, an endocrinologist at the Harvard-affliated Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, who led the study, said men showed increased testosterone levels when andro was taken for seven days in a single daily 300 milligram dose.
On the Internet, pills available are in doses of 50 to 300 milligrams.
The 42 subjects, ages 20 to 40, were divided into three groups and received either no androstenedione, 100 mg daily or 300 mg daily.
In the 300 mg group, testosterone levels in the blood increased by an average of 34 percent by the seventh day, though levels had returned to normal by the following day.
Although the study only looked at if the supplement increased hormone levels, Leder noted that long-term increases in testosterone or estrogen can have serious side effects.
Side effects include stunted growth for young people, increased aggressiveness, and lower levels of ``good'' cholesterol, which could increase risk of heart disease.
Men with elevated estrogen levels sometimes grow breasts and suffer shrunken testicles, while women with elevated testosterone can develop masculine traits, such as deepening of voice and extra hair.
In a eight-week study by Douglas King at Iowa State University published in JAMA last June, King found that andro caused none of the expected increases in blood levels of testosterone and no enhanced strength.
However, the 300 mg dosages were given in 100 mg increments three times a day.
Leder said that their study also found that 100 milligrams is too small a dose to increase testosterone levels.
``I certainly wouldn't recommend anyone to take it,'' said King, associate professor of health and human performance at Iowa State.
And King warned that because the testosterone levels do not stay elevated for very long, people may take it several times a day to keep levels elevated, which could be dangerous.
For now, Major League Baseball does not plan to change its policy.
``That androstenedione, when taken in higher than suggested doses, elevates testosterone levels, appears to be a significant contribution to the science surrounding its use,'' said Baseball Commissioner Bud Selig.
But he and Don Fehr, director of the players union, said that more research is needed.
Mark McGwire of the St.
Louis Cardinals has said that he has since stopped using the supplement.
While some of the professional sports leagues are still waiting for more data, their team doctors have come out against the supplement.
The Association of Professional Team Physicians, an organization comprised of team physicians of the NBA, NHL, MLB, and NFL said in 1998 that it recommended androstenedione be taken off the consumer market, reclassified as a controlled substance available only by prescription, and it urged the drug be banned from competitive sports.
``The study fortifies our position,'' said Dr.
William Straw, who is the team physician for the San Jose Sharks, a National Hockey League team, and was the team physician for baseball's San Francisco Giants for 13 years.
``From a medical point of view, the study justifies physicians' concern that andro is potentially harmful, like any other anabolic steroid,'' said Straw.
``By its chemical composition, it is an anabolic steroid''.
Straw criticized drug deregulation laws in 1994 for allowing such easy access to supplements like andro.
``These things are out of control,'' said Straw.
John Brennan, spokesman of the Office of National Drug Control Policy, said the federal government is studying if androstenedione ``fits all the elements of a steroid, which is a banned substance''.
If andro does, then it would probably be reclassified so that it could not be taken without a doctor's prescription, said Brennan.
When Samantha Reeves, a well-regarded amateur finding her way through her freshman season on the women's professional tennis circuit, wanted to hustle herself back into shape after sustaining an ankle injury late in 1997, she said she decided to experiment with a newfangled ``all-natural'' dietary supplement, apparently on the recommendation of a friend.
The product promised to help her burn fat and build muscle, and it was readily available over the counter at health-food stores.
It sounded like the answer to her prayers: a training and diet aid that would help her get fit fast and get back to the business of cracking the top 100 in women's tennis.
Instead, Reeves' decision to use the product backfired badly.
Required to submit a urine sample at an event last December as part of tennis' effort to detect improper drug use, Reeves failed the test.
The dietary product, it turned out, had contained Nor-Andro 19, a variation on the classic steroid nandrolone and one of the substances banned by the sport.
And so Reeves, despite her argument that she had no intention of taking anything aimed at improperly aiding her performance, became the first female tennis player ever to have tested positive for steroids.
``I have never knowingly done anything that would be harmful to my tennis career,'' Reeves said in a statement that her family released after her test result was made public this summer.
The International Tennis Federation, which governs the sport, ultimately did not suspend or otherwise discipline Reeves, who was ranked No.
1 in the U.S.
Girls 18's in 1996, is currently ranked 106th in the world, and is undecided about whether to accept a college scholarship or turn pro.
Citing her age _ she turned 19 earlier this year _ and inexperience, and apparently accepting her claim that she was unaware of the presence of steroids in the product, the ITF instead called the long and embarrassing ordeal of testing, investigation and public disclosure ``a sanction in itself''.
ITF spokesman Alun James said the investigation ``proved Reeves guilty of taking the banned substance and, although the decision against any further punishment is arguably lenient, if caught again, she could face a life ban as a second offender''.
Reeves' case highlights a little discussed but troubling question for tennis: With the easy availability of illicit steroids, and the simultaneous explosion of fitness and muscle-building products that are sold legally but often with little warning about what they contain, how many players are trying to gain an inappropriate edge?
Only one other player, Ignacio Truyol of Spain, has ever been formally detected of having used steroids.
Can tennis fairly and effectively police such use and the cheating _ either brazen or accidental _ that results?
``Tennis is a sport I would not have thought would be steroid-involved, but there's tons of steroids out there these days, and they're not all coming from the black market,'' said Dr.
Alan Jones, a pharmaceutics professor at the University of Mississippi who acts as the toxicology consultant for the company that administers drug testing for the men's ATP and women's WTA tours and for the ITF.
Jones said numerous high-tech or nouveau steroids are being marketed as simple food supplements and training aids and sold everywhere from the Internet to health-food stores.
``It's conceivable that a player could be oblivious to the fact that they're using something that contains an anabolic substance,'' Jones said.
``They think: It's natural, it's pure, it's good for me.
And that is an absolute fallacy''.
Considering the plethora of legal products, such as creatine, available to athletes looking to boost their endurance, maximize their workouts and stave off flab, athletes subject to drug testing evidently cannot be too careful about what they ingest.
Whether in the guise of vitamins, hormone supplements or food additives, there is apparently a synthetically engineered anabolic look-alike out there for everyone, whether the athletes are looking to raise a barbell or their tennis ranking.
While less invasive than the EPO-type injectables that recently tarnished cycling's Tour de France, or the substances currently muddying the reputation of Irish swimmer Michelle Smith de Bruin, anabolics such as norandrolone, which is not regulated by the Food and Drug Administration, are far from benign.
And once these legal additives break down in the system, a steroid by any other name tends to turn into a steroid.
The Nor-Andro 19 in the supplement Reeves chose is a product that, according to Jones, ``is the new kid on the block, the popular one right now.
It's not a testosterone type of steroid, and the labs originally weren't testing for it.
It's offered as a food supplement and marketed as a performance and training enhancer that increases muscle strength, mass and endurance''.
Jones did say he was unaware of the product's ever having been marketed as a weight-loss product.
Tennis has stepped up its testing and the detection efforts of its anti-doping program, which is modeled on the one used by the International Olympic Committee.
The ITF, in conjunction with the WTA and ATP tours, conducts roughly 1,000 tests each year, all of them random and 10 percent of them in locations other than the site of tournaments.
The cost to the three tennis organizations is approximately $500,000 per year, and so far, the only other player found guilty of using steroids is the 23-year-old Truyol, who said he took them on the advice of his physician when recovering from an injury.
``No sport is immune anymore,'' said Dr.
Donna Smith of Substance Abuse Management, the company that administers tennis' anti-doping program.
``Wherever you have issues of injury recovery and athletes intent on maximizing their training, you're going to see this stuff.
``Our window of detection is small, because most of these products clear the system within five days, and although we'd like to do more off-site testing, it's prohibitively expensive.
You always feel like you're one step behind''.
nn According to the Reeves family, Samantha's use of the steroid was purely accidental.
The only people more surprised than the player herself were her parents, Jack and Jill Reeves.
Their teen-age daughter was fixated on losing weight, Jack Reeves said, and, unbeknownst to him and his wife, bought the supplement.
When the family was notified, by fax, of the positive test and was asked to provide a record of every medication Samantha had ingested, steroids were not initially revealed as the culprit behind the positive reading, Jack Reeves said.
Then came a phone call that informed them of the source of the positive result: The illegal nandrolone metabolites in her system were traced to Nor-Andro 19.
Just after the conclusion of Wimbledon last month, the ITF announced that Reeves had tested positive for anabolic steroids.
``We thought it was good news that they'd figured out how the stuff got into her system; we thought that was the end of it,'' said Jack Reeves, who would not permit his daughter to be interviewed.
``Then we were told the review board had decided to pursue the case and test a second sample.
It's a kind of guilty-until-proven-innocent process where you're dealing with a lot of nameless, faceless parties.
They do hold a player responsible for whatever is in their system, and they're not particularly interested in how it got there.
You'd have to be a molecular biologist to know this would occur.
``It's been a very troublesome, frustrating experience; tennis is such a mental game, and this has put a lot of extra pressure on her,'' he said.
``These days, Samantha won't drink a glass of water without having it analyzed''.
(STORY CAN END HERE.
OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS) The Reeves had allowed their daughter to leave high school in Wisconsin for Dennis Van Der Meer's Tennis Academy in Hilton Head, S.C., after she was selected for the U.S.
Tennis Association National Junior Team in 1995 and '96.
Then, her parents let her take a year off between high school graduation in 1997 and college to test the waters on the circuit while retaining her college eligibility.
They had expected to spend the first half of 1998 monitoring their daughter's progress on the WTA Tour; instead, they spent it helping her weather the six-month investigation by the ITF's anti-doping panel.
In addition to being the first female tennis player ever to fail a drug test of any sort, Reeves is also the first player to fail a test but escape the mandatory one-year suspension for players found guilty of using a Class One banned substance.
On the men's side, Truyol was suspended for a year in January 1997, and Mats Wilander and Karel Novacek were previously fined and suspended after testing positive for cocaine.
If only two players have tested positive after thousands of tests, does it mean that tennis can rest assured it has no steroid problem?
Some players say no.
Jim Courier, who trained his way to the No.
1 ranking and four Grand Slam singles championships without steroid shortcuts, said: ``If being big and strong were the main criteria for being a good player, then weight lifters would be the best.
But I can see where this stuff might help out some of the more slight guys, because it can make you train like an animal.
``No one worked harder on their training than I did, and it disgusts me to think I may have lost matches to guys who've been juicing and cycling it out of their systems in time for competition,'' he said.
``Boris Becker once said that if he knew for sure everybody else was using steroids, then he would too; well, not me.
I don't want kidney problems at 45''.
Courier recalled a poll of Olympians that asked whether the athletes would take a drug that guaranteed them a medal even if it also guaranteed terminal health trouble by mid-life: ``I guess it's the James Dean thing, live fast, die young, leave a beautiful corpse _ and a gold medal''.
Debbie Graham, a WTA Tour veteran, said: ``I think there's a lot of it going on because of the pressures in women's sports, and not just to win.
There's a lot of pressure for a woman to look fit in front of a crowd''.
As far as Samantha Reeves is concerned, she continued to play sporadically this year and Tuesday received a wild-card berth for the U.S.
Open later this month.
``I'm anxious to put the entire experience behind me,'' she said in a statement she gave to the U.S.
Tennis Association.
Truyol, whose suspension ended in January, has not returned to the ATP Tour and no longer holds a ranking.
Experts who study the effects of synthetic anabolic steroids are encouraged, for two distinctly different reasons, that two new trials of their use show a benefit for two groups of very sick people.
One reason is the possible long-term benefits for the patients.
But the other is that the trials may serve as a reminder of whom the drugs were not intended for: healthy people who use them in ways that can destroy their health.
The trials, reported last week, found that taking anabolic steroids helped kidney dialysis patients and people with HIV regain some of the weight they had been losing uncontrollably as a result of their illnesses.
Dr. Gary Wadler, an anabolic-steroid authority at New York University Medical Center, points out that the first widespread use of the drug came after World War II for people who were wasting away from illnesses or injuries suffered in the war or in concentration camps.
It was for these people, the very sick, that steroids were developed, he said, not for healthy athletes seeking to build bigger muscles to improve their athletic performance.
The latter include baseball's new home-run king, Mark McGwire, who says he regularly takes androstenedione, a precursor steroid that quickly becomes anabolic once taken into the body.
Professional baseball, unlike other sports, has not banned this substance.
Medical experts say athletes frequently take anabolic steroids in doses high enough to have dangerous consequences, with some users known to have taken 10 to 100 times the recommended dosage.
These steroids are synthesized from human testosterone, the hormone responsible for male characteristics like increased muscle tissue, facial hair and a deep voice.
Testosterone's effect as a muscle builder was discovered more than 100 years ago by the French physician Charles-Edouard Brown-Sequard, who in 1889 injected animal extracts into a dog and then into himself.
At the time, he hypothesized that added testosterone would be good for human health.
``Brown-Sequard overinterpreted what was happening, but he turned out to be onto something, as history has shown,'' Wadler said.
The synthetic forms of testosterone were designed to replace the body's normal supply of the hormone, which can be depleted by disease, and to help the patient regain strength, Wadler said in ``Drugs and the Athlete'' (Oxford Press), regarded as the definitive textbook on the subject.
Dr. Peter Goldberg, a consulting physician for the U.S.
Olympic Committee, expressed similar concern about the expanding use of steroids, especially among teen-agers.
Adolescent females are now the fastest growing group of users.
With a colleague, Dr.
Diane Elliot, Goldberg recently completed a program for 3,200 athletes in 31 high schools in Oregon and Washington among whom steroid use was reduced by a reported 50 percent.
In the clinical trials of anabolic steroids for kidney-dialysis and HIV patients, low doses were used to reverse previously uncontrollable weight loss, which has been associated with sharply reduced life spans among these groups.
The patients, in the two separate studies reported last week in The Journal of the American Medical Association, were given the steroids in conjunction with exercise programs.
Both groups of patients increased muscle mass significantly more than a group given a placebo, and increased their abilities to do more exercise faster while becoming less fatigued.
More studies are needed to determine how much and for how long steroids can be safely used, the doctors who directed the studies said.
But they pointed out that the doses used by the athletes were much higher.
Weighing medical uses against the uses to enhance athletic performance, those who take steroids must ask: What is a safe dose and when does a dose become dangerous?
The second question is being urgently studied at a number of major institutions.
In the meantime, Wadler said, all science really knows on the subject is this: It has been found safe to increase the amount of testosterone or testosterone substitute to the normal level among sick people whose supply has become depleted.
But at some level above this, the substitutes can have disastrous results.
The list of problems doctors cite is very long: liver tumors, uncontrollably violent behavior, elevated cholesterol, enlarged veins in the liver that cause fatal bleeding, permanent stunting of growth in adolescents, and blood clotting that leads to premature stroke and heart attacks.
The list of less serious but nevertheless undesirable effects is also long and includes large breasts in men and beards in women.
SEATTLE _ Mark McGwire's record-setting home run race made 1998 a banner year for baseball and sports in general.
But it also made it a banner year for an issue far more serious and potentially devastating: athletes using performance-enhancing substances to build bigger and stronger bodies.
McGwire's admission that he used two supplements, creatine and androstenedione or ``andro,'' suddenly put new light on a decades-old battle to stem the use of anabolic steroids and other so-called ergogenic aids in athletic competition.
With McGwire's admission has come a new set of concerns: (BBOX)That more young athletes will attempt to use supplements as a way of improving performance, fitness and recovery from injuries, instead of building body strength naturally.
(BBOX)That the supplements will be lumped together and considered to be medically sound simply because they are available over the counter or via mail order.
(BBOX)That policies such as the University of Washington's to administer creatine to athletes might some day create great liability if medical complications are found in the future.
(BBOX)That while creatine is considered medically safe, andro is considered to be an anabolic steroid that can lead to several potentially life-threatening diseases.
Linking the two and using both without proper medical supervision could prove dangerous.
While McGwire will go down in the history books as the unqualified home run champion for a single season, other athletes who used similar substances last year faced far different repercussions.
Most recently, Petr Korda was forced to forfeit his rankings points and $94,529 in prize money from Wimbledon after the International Tennis Federation found he tested positive for an anabolic steroid.
His attempt to defend his 1998 Australian Open title ended over the weekend, but his appearance stirred controversy among his fellow players, who question how Korda could have been allowed to compete.
Despite warnings from the medical community and ethical questions about unfair competition, athletes like McGwire and Korda are big-name indicators that supplements have become ingrained at all levels in the world of athletics.
``We can easily blame ourselves and society for putting professional and high-level collegiate athletes on such a pedestal that it's going to influence our high school athletes,'' said Dr.
Mark S.
Juhn of the University of Washington's Primary Care Center Sports Medicine Clinic.
``I think that's a shame, but it's reality''.
According to the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, up to 13 percent of all high school athletes use anabolic steroids and 40 percent of those athletes believe the illegal drug is not harmful.
Supplement use appears to be starting at younger ages.
A study published in May by the journal Pediatrics found that nearly 3 percent of boys and girls at four Massachusetts middle schools were using anabolic steroids to build bigger bodies for sports.
``It's ubiquitous, there's no doubt about that,'' said Charles Yesalis, a Penn State professor of health and human development who has written a book on the subject, ``The Steroids Game''.
McGwire's admitted use makes him ``a very poor role model for kids, and he can argue that it's legal to buy in society, but that's merely a loophole in the laws.
He can say anything he wants, but it's a drug''.
Patrick Olsen, president of the Washington Vocational Sports Medicine Association and the head athletic trainer at South Kitsap High School, has seen the problem first-hand and believes McGwire's admission has only clouded the issue.
``Anyone who wants to be good at whatever they do has some sort of a hero.
And if their hero is using (a performance supplement), then they will be more susceptible to it,'' Olsen said.
``They think, `This can't hurt me because I don't have to have a prescription for it'.
They fail to realize that you can buy arsenic too, but you wouldn't want to use it''.
The issue becomes all the more confusing to the average young athlete because creatine and andro are two entirely different supplements.
Creatine is an amino acid powder found naturally in skeletal muscle, heart, brain, testes and other tissues.
It is classified as a dietary supplement that enhances muscle growth and weight gain, and not a drug.
``Creatine is acceptable, and it does enhance performance,'' Yesalis said.
``Although, if you could get the proper dose of creatine in the food supply, why would anybody pay for it?
It will cost you $40 to $50 a month''.
Andro, on the other hand, is considered an anabolic steroid because taken as a pill it raises the level of the male hormone testosterone, and users claim it builds muscle mass and helps speed recovery from sports-related injuries.
Because it is still available at many vitamin stores, mail-order businesses and Internet suppliers, andro is not considered an illegal substance by major league baseball or the NBA, which ban only illegal drugs.
Because of the controversy surrounding McGwire's use of andro, baseball commissioner Bud Selig and players union head Donald Fehr have appointed a committee to study whether it should be banned, but the committee has yet to reach a conclusion.
Andro, however, already has been banned by the International Olympic Committee, the NCAA and the ATP tennis tour, and the NFL has banned its use since 1996, primarily because it can be classified with other steroids.
While the method of taking the steroid is far different from the injections athletes once used, many experts believe the basic health repercussions are the same: excessive acne, shrinkage of the testicles or uterus, and potentially life-threatening ailments such as liver damage, premature heart disease and cancer.
While McGwire can set the home run record using andro, other athletes haven't been so lucky.
Gold medal shot-putter Randy Barnes, the world-record holder, drew a lifetime ban last year for testing positive for andro.
And in September, Pittsburgh Steelers offensive tackle Paul Wiggins was suspended for four games after admitting he used the substance.
Use of creatine, however, hasn't yet been banned by any sports organization, although there is plenty of debate about its effects and potential long-term health risks.
``Some of our athletes have been using creatine for three years or so,'' South Kitsap's Olsen said.
``It's not something we supply, it's not something we tell our kids they have to be on.
They go out to their own people and do their own thing on it''.
Creatine currently is the supplement of choice for body building, primarily because it is not an anabolic steroid and because so many athletes endorse its use.
At the University of Washington, strength and conditioning coach Rick Huegli said creatine has been dispensed to many athletes under his direct supervision, with little or no apparent ill effects.
``It enhances the short-term burst energy system,'' Huegli said, adding that most of the benefit comes during weightlifting training, rather than in on-field performance.
Huegli advises athletes to begin a program of better nutrition and training without the use of supplements before trying anything like creatine.
But he says athletes will always be tempted to use supplements because it ``helps them recover better and train longer and harder''.
In the past, Huegli said the UW would dispense a one-month supply of creatine to any athlete who wanted to use it, but the school has recently discontinued the practice for fear of liability should an athlete develop a medical problem in the future.
Athletes now must buy their own supply.
It's not hard to find young athletes who have used creatine.
One high school football player, Brian, of Mountlake Terrace, said he began using the supplement last year in an attempt to build more muscle mass and help him during offseason weight training.
He learned about creatine from other players who were using it on a regular basis.
But after experiencing some weight gain, he soon decided that the expense wasn't worth the results he was seeing.
``I just felt that it was better to do it naturally,'' he said.
Another high school football player, a 17-year-old from Edmonds, still uses creatine and says he grew from 167 pounds to 190 pounds in about six months after using the supplement and increasing his workouts.
``It doesn't work unless you also work harder, but it helps you work harder,'' he said.
The medical jury still is out on creatine, but it appears to be far safer than an anabolic steroid or a product such as andro.
However, there are few studies on its effects on adolescents, and none on long-term effects.
``It's very difficult to separate fact from hype when it comes to creatine,'' said Juhn of UW's sports medicine clinic.
``Creatine has some potential, but people have this underlying assumption that it works for everything, but it doesn't''.
For example, it doesn't help sprinters or distance people in track or swimming, said Juhn, who recently published a study on potential side effects of creatine in the Clinical Journal of Sport Medicine.
Juhn says the weight gain associated with creatine is largely due to water storage.
``The big issue is, in the long-term, does creatine improve strength?
That's up for debate right now,'' he said.
With concern being voiced by doctors such as Juhn, trainers like Olsen are all the more wary of its potential for abuse.
``There's no long-term study done on creatine, so you have no information from 10 years out,'' Olsen said.
From the information he has seen, Olsen believes there are several reasons to beware of the supplement: dehydration, possible kidney problems and cost.
He reports some young athletes spend hundreds of dollars on the product with minimal results.
Compared to andro or other steroids, creatine ``is probably the least harmful, but in 10 years you might have some kid who took three or four times the normal dose and find it was overworking the kidneys or something like that,'' Olsen said.
``If you get a symptom such as kidney failure 15 years down the road, how do you relate that back to their creatine use''?
There have been some benefits, Olsen said, noting some athletes have gained 10 to 15 pounds in weight and muscle mass.
``But once they get off of it, they lose maybe half that weight,'' he said.
``It takes so much water to digest that protein''.
Juhn notes that creatine is found not only in muscles, but in the brain, the heart, the liver and testicles.
``We haven't really studied what taking oral levels of creatine does to creatine levels elsewhere,'' he said.
``I'm saying we don't know.
... For all we know, creatine might be the safest thing in the world, but we haven't proven that''.
Olsen says he doesn't know of any of his athletes who are currently taking andro, but he's convinced that many kids are trying it.
``I bet if you talk to kids, most would say they're not scared by it,'' he said.
``It's the idea, would you trade a gold medal if you could only live five years?
Yeah, give me the gold medal''.
Yesalis believes there will always be some new product on the market that will attract athletes.
One is human growth hormone, which is used as an ergogenic supplement by body builders and has such a short half-life it is nearly impossible to detect by standard drug-testing methods.
Yesalis contends that many athletes who use creatine or andro do so to mask their hidden use of human growth hormone to build even bigger bodies.
``Some athletes have been using creatine and andro as a smokescreen for their use of other more potent supplements,'' he said.
With so many athletes using such products, there might be no way to turn back the tide short of drug testing at every level of athletics.
``I'm disturbed by the emphasis put on supplements when we should be thinking about the most proven method of enhancing athletic performance, which is dedication, perseverance, hard work and practice,'' Juhn said.
``It's really discouraging, what's happening now.''
HOUSTON _ During a U.S.
Gymnastics meet last March in Baytown, Texas, a teen-age contestant approached one of the visiting members of the Olympic team and asked what he could do to gain strength.
``Lift weights,'' he was told.
``And eat your Wheaties''.
``Wheaties''? ``Special Wheaties,'' the older gymnast said, with a grin and a wink.
The teen-ager asked no more questions.
He understood the coded message: steroids.
Anabolic steroids, which made their first impact on athletic competition with the world-record weightlifting performances by the 1956 Russian Olympic team, are still in prominent use despite the health hazards they pose.
Last month, Olympic shot-put champion Randy Barnes tested positive _ for the second time in his career _ for performance-enhancing banned substances.
Also failing his steroid test, at about the same time, was Olympic sprinter Dennis Mitchell, a bronze medalist in 1992.
Anabolic (which means ``building'') steroids were made illegal in the United States in 1990, except with medical prescription.
They are designed to imitate testosterone or to stimulate its production.
Testosterone, a male sex hormone (also found in small amounts in women), induces growth of skeletal muscles.
But at the dosage levels needed to build muscle, the steroids put so much strain on the liver, kidneys and heart that the athlete risks death before the age of 50.
Pro football star Lyle Alzado and many weightlifting competitors of the 1970s died young, ravaged by tumors and cardiac disease.
Dr. Bill Bryan of the Baylor Sports Medicine Institute in Houston believes steroid use has declined in the past decade.
But he said, ``Once you get into the elite levels of athletics, the least bit of performance enhancement becomes important, and those people will try all the tricks''.
This summer, the sport of bicycle racing has been scandalized by EPO, which stands for erythropoietin (eri-throw-poy-i-tin).
This is a steroid that stimulates the bone marrow to produce red blood cells, which carry oxygen to the muscles.
EPO is a significant performance enhancer for endurance athletes, such as five Tour de France bicyclists who recently disqualified themselves by admitting use of the banned substance.
Dr. Gerald Gremion, after resigning his position of consultant for Swiss bicycle teams, said ``almost all'' the Tour de France cyclists use performance-enhancing drugs.
He told reporters in Europe: ``Each racer had his little suitcase with dopes and syringes''.
&QL; FOILING TESTS &QL; &QL; Like other steroids, EPO has legitimate medical purposes, when used in moderate amounts.
A protein-carbohydrate compound, EPO is helpful in treating kidney disease, AIDS and cancer.
But it is dangerous when taken in dosages large enough to affect performance in a marathon run or a bicycle race.
``The problem,'' said Dr.
Kenneth Renney of Sports Medicine Associates in Houston, ``is that you don't know exactly how much to use and what the effects are.
If you get too many blood cells, you can get sluggish, and the blood thickens''.
That leaves athletes at risk of blood-clotting, stroke and heart attacks.
In the past 20 years, EPO has been implicated in more than two dozen deaths in cycling.
EPO usually goes undetected because tests cannot distinguish between the hormone produced by the kidneys from the laboratory version.
But when blood tests reveal an excessive percentage of red blood cells, the athlete is presumed to be using EPO illegally and is suspended for two weeks.
EPO is one of at least 20 anabolic steroids prohibited by the International Olympics Committee.
New ones are constantly being invented.
No sooner is one blacklisted than another emerges to confound drug testers.
Many Olympic athletes try to foil the tests by using masking agents or a new batch of difficult-to-trace water-based steroids.
Renney, a crew chief of the U.S.
Olympic drug-testing committee, said, ``There's no masking agent that will keep steroids from being detected.
That's why some athletes fail the test.
But they can use diuretics that will get the steroids out of their system quickly, and they can use some new steroids that are water-based, that clear the body a lot faster that the oil-based ones''.
Bryan said tests will be developed that will make it more difficult for athletes to cheat with steroids.
``A Japanese company is developing biological markers that will detect the steroids people are taking,'' he said.
``The technology may be at that level to test the athletes at the 2000 Olympics in Sydney.
We'll be able to shut down the use of anabolic steroids significantly''.
Until then, many athletes engage in a delicate balancing act, trying to take as many hormone supplements as they can _ legal and illegal _ without exceeding the limits of red blood count or the 6-to-1 ratio between testosterone and its metabolic breakdown product of epitestosterone.
&QL; THE ADDICTION &QL; &QL; Dr.
Greg Hoover, a sports medicine specialist in Houston, said new products allow athletes to fine-tune the testosterone level.
``Some athletes are using testosterone patches that release the testosterone into the body at a gradual, lower dose,'' he said, ``like a Nicorette patch''.
Renney explained that the testosterone limit was set to take into account that ``everyone is going to have some type of level of anabolic steroids, since they are found naturally in the body''.
Although men generally have a testosterone/epi ratio of 3 to 1 or 4 to 1, some are naturally as high as 6 to 1.
``Most people could take anabolic steroids and still be within that approved level,'' Renney said.
``You can look at the tests, and you may know the athlete is on steroids, but there's nothing you can do about it''.
Mitchell, ironically a vocal opponent of steroids, tested over the limit.
Barnes, who formerly competed for Texas A&AMP;M University in College Station, Texas, was cited for using androstenedione, which is found in wild yams and is legal in the United States and most other countries but has been banned from Olympic competition because of its steroidlike qualities.
While Olympic athletes, such as Barnes and Mitchell, occasionally slip up and get caught, Renney said, ``If they want to do it, they're going to find a way to beat the system''.
It would be naive to think anabolic steroids have been eradicated from the National Football League, which has a limited drug-testing program, or from Major League Baseball, which has no drug-testing program at all.
Since possession of anabolic steroids is illegal, no big-leaguers admit, on the record, to using them.
But some say, anonymously, that about 30 percent of the hitters include them in their muscle-building program.
Phil Garner, manager of the Milwaukee Brewers, said, ``There was one kid, 27, who was cycling steroids, and I asked him, `Do you realize you could need an artificial heart when you're 40 years old'?
``He said, `I don't care what happens at 40.
All I want to do is be the biggest, baddest guy I can be right now'''.
That was the thinking of Mike Spinelli, a 1995 fourth-round draft choice of the Boston Red Sox, who began ingesting steroids at 18.
In two years, Spinelli's 6-2 frame filled out from 180 to 245 pounds.
But he did not pitch well: 4-10 with a 5.57 ERA in two minor-league seasons.
Aware that he was addicted to steroids, Spinelli checked himself into the Hazelden Foundation in Minnesota last February.
``I just thank God I was able to get out of this,'' he said, ``before it killed me''.
&QL; &QL; THE TEMPTATION &QL; &QL; Athletes _ and even nonathletes _ much younger than Spinelli have been turning to steroids.
A report by the National Clearinghouse on Alcohol and Drug Abuse estimates that half a million Americans under the age of 18 are using illegal steroids.
A recent survey of 965 pupils in Massachusetts middle schools found that 2.7 percent admitted to using anabolic steroids, with the percentages almost the same for girls as for boys.
Some were as young as 10 years old.
Apparently, parents are buying these substances on the black market and passing them on to their athlete children.
But studies also have shown that about 40 percent of the high school students using steroids are doing so not to compete in sports but to improve their appearance.
Charles Yesalis, a Ph.D. at Penn State University, recently reported that about 1 percent of girls in grades eight through 12 have used anabolic hormones _ a 100 percent increase by this group since 1996.
Among teen-age males, steroid use had remained stable at about 4 percent.
Such figures dismay Garner, who has seen the alarming effects of steroids on men in their 20s.
``You'd see guys suddenly add a lot of muscle,'' Garner said.
``They'd say, `I'm just lifting weights'.
But then you'd see them tear up phone booths at night and lift cars at odd hours, and you'd say, `You're doing something else'''.
Garner understands the temptation.
``You realize you can't compete against somebody doing steroids,'' he said.
``They're faster, quicker, stronger''.
In 1988, he looked to steroids as a means of delaying the end of his playing career.
He thought they might help him regain the 10 pounds of muscle mass he had lost after back surgery.
``I only knew one player who had done steroids at that time, and I talked with him about using them to put muscle back on,'' Garner said.
``But I had some friends who were doctors, and they told me, `You might have heart disease in 10 years'''.
He decided he didn't want to sacrifice years of life for a few extra glory days.
``But the kids today''? he said.
``I don't know if they're thinking about the future''.
&QL; XXXX END OF STORY &QL;
AMMAN, Jordan (AP) --Two Moroccan female athletes have been stripped of gold and bronze medals for using a muscle-building steroid in the first reported cases of doping at the Arab Games, an official said Friday.
Siham Hanifi will lose her gold in the women's 200 meters and Morocco will also have to give up another gold it won in the 400-meter relay because Hanifi was part of the team, said Reda Kazem, the head of the Arab Games Doping Committee.
A second Moroccan, Karima Shaheen, will also lose the bronze medal for the women's discus throw, Kazem said.
Both athletes tested positive for Nandrolone, a muscle-building steroid that has been the cause of a rash of recent positive tests --including several at the Pan American Games and even others announced this week in advance of the World Championships.
Kazem said only Shaheen's and Hanifi's samples tested positive among the 84 sent to an International Olympic Committee-accredited laboratory in the German city of Kreischa, near Leipzig.
``Compared to international figures, this is reasonable,'' Kazem said.
``We only tested athletes competing in the track and field events.
No other tests have been conducted yet,'' he said.
He said most gold medal winners were tested.
Suspicions about Hanifi were raised after she boosted her performance dramatically in the 200 meters, a day after losing badly in the 100 meters.
The track and field events were held Aug.
11-14 while the games formally opened on Aug.
15 for other events.
On Wednesday, 39-year-old Jamaican sprinter Merlene Ottey withdrew from the World Championships after testing positive for Nandrolone.
In the last month, Cuba's Javier Sotomayor, Britain's Linford Christie and American Dennis Mitchell have also seen their careers tarnished by positive tests.
Kazem said Hanifi and Shaheen have the right to appeal.
The Arab Games' Steriods Committee does not have the jurisdiction to ban athletes.
Bans imposed by international organizations range between two months and life.
The head of the games' executive committee, Sari Hamdan, rejected accusations that the organizers were victimizing Moroccan athletes.
``We don't accuse athletes falsely and we don't accuse the country of working with steroids.
We have 100 percent confidence in the tests and everything has been conducted according to the international rules and regulations,'' Hamdan said.
Drug testing was introduced in the Arab Games for the first time in 1997 when the championships were held in Beirut, Lebanon.
Twelve athletes tested positive for banned substances during those games.
Whether trying to reach stardom in high school sports, working to achieve a fashionable lean-but-muscular look or suffering from a deep psychological disorder, teen-age girls are using illegal anabolic steroids in sharply increasing numbers, health authorities say.
The increased usage among girls, which some researchers attribute in part to a kind of reverse anorexia, has caught up to levels that began to be established by boys in the 1980s.
And steroid use, researchers say, exposes girls to the same severe health risks, but with the added potential of destroying their ability to bear children.
The National Institutes of Drug Abuse says about 175,000 teen-age girls in the United States have reported taking anabolic steroids at least once within a year of the time surveyed _ a rise of 100 percent since 1991.
The surveys, by the University of Michigan's Institute for Social Research, the National Household Survey of Drug Abuse and the Youth Risk and Behavior Survey System, were done in schools or the home through anonymous self-reported questionnaires.
Dr. Lloyd D.
Johnston, director of the Michigan project, which has been conducting annual youth surveys since 1975, said the actual number of users may actually be higher than the most recent surveys show, since people tend to underreport drug use.
The rate among teen-age boys has also continued to rise, to the current estimated level of 325,000.
Other indications, including the results of a small study in Oregon, are that steroid use among both girls and boys is increasing unabated.
The three national surveys were conducted before Mark McGwire set baseball's single-season home run record last year, acknowledging that he used androstenedione, a precursor of testosterone, to help him build muscle.
Whether androstenedione, which is allowed in professional baseball but banned in other sports, does in fact build muscles remains a matter of medical dispute, though the perception of many athletes, both adult and adolescent, is that it does.
In any case, sports medicine doctors generally agree that its potential for inducing serious side effects is similar to that of anabolic steroids.
``I get calls every day from the coaches and parents of girls as well as boys,'' said Dr.
Linn Goldberg, a physician at Oregon Health Sciences University in Portland and a United States Olympic Committee drug testing official.
``Some are concerned and some want to know whether their children should use androstenedione''.
His answer is an unequivocal no, either to use of steroids or androstenedione.
Anabolic steroids are synthetic substitutes for testosterone, the hormone that directs the body to produce or add male characteristics like increased muscle mass, facial hair and a deep voice.
The hormone exists in females as well, though in much smaller amounts.
Liver cancer, heart disease and uncontrollable aggressiveness are among other serious side effects that can occur in both males and females of all ages.
The health damages might not appear for years or decades after the steroids are taken, said Dr.
Gary I.
Wadler, a professor of clinical medicine at New York University School of Medicine.
Dr. Charles E.
Yesalis, a steroid authority at Pennsylvania State University, was among the first to analyze the 1997 female-adolescent data in December of that year in the Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine and to sound the alarm.
Most prevention programs, he said recently, have not been effective.
``I am asked to speak in schools and other institutions,'' Yesalis said, ``but you don't get anywhere with speeches or charts or film clips or posters.
We know one-shot messages don't work''.
Goldberg said teen-age boys and girls generally obtain illegal steroids from people who congregate at commercial gyms.
``That's where most people say they obtain them,'' Goldberg said.
``Someone, in this part of the country, will go down to Mexico, where it is easy to get the stuff, and bring it back, either in pill form or injectables''.
And then one young person will buy some and distribute them to his or her schoolmates, he said.
The new interest among teen-age girls, these and other health experts say, reflect a gradual change in attitude, and fashion, or teen-age peer pressure, away from a preoccupation with thinness.
Some teen-age girls now desire to look more healthy and somewhat more muscular, but this has led some girls toward an unhealthy compulsion to be ever fitter with larger muscles.
``We've gone from the overweight beauty of the Rubens women, to the thin rail of the Twiggy types and now back to something in between, the lean but muscular type,'' Wadler said.
``These are people who are virtually addicted to the mirror.
But they will never be satisfied with what they see, and this is now happening to teen-age girls who want bigger muscles no matter how much bigger their muscles have become''.
Dr. Harrison G.
Pope Jr.
, chief of the Biological Psychiatry Laboratory of Harvard Medical School's McLean Hospital, and colleagues referred to a similar disorder in male weight lifters as ``reverse anorexia'' after it was observed in 1993.
The researchers recently updated the work with a study of 32 women bodybuilders, 17 of whom showed signs of an emotional disorder called body dysmorphism, which is the excessive preoccupation with a trait or traits of the body viewed as ugly or defective whether they are or not.
Several women in the study were so addicted to working out that they cut off job opportunities and close personal relationships.
But Pope said too little research had been done on this emerging obsession among teen-age girls to draw specific conclusions about its complex causes.
(STORY CAN END HERE.
OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS) nn The case of one of the worst known adverse reactions to steroid use, reported by Goldberg, is that of a 19-year-old West Coast woman who was preparing to enter her first bodybuilding contest, lifting weights and eating a high-protein diet.
She then switched to a drastically reduced intake of food and water.
Obsessed with her goal, she began taking anabolic steroids and a diuretic.
The steroid would add muscle and the diuretic would drain the body of fluid and make the muscle stand out more.
She won the contest, but it will probably be her last.
After she collected her trophy, she resumed drinking water and eating normally, and her weight shot up by 25 pounds in three days.
It turned out that the diuretic had masked the actual amount of muscle she had built up, said Goldberg, who was one of a group of health experts who reviewed the case.
When she drank more fluids, he said, her muscles pushed out to the full over-developed size and crushed blood vessels in her legs.
Called compartment syndrome, the condition put her limbs, if not her life, in danger, and surgeons had to cut open both legs to protect her vascular system and remove significant amounts of the new muscle tissue.
Goldberg and Dr.
Diane L.
Elliot hope to educate girls about the dangers of steroid use as they have done with boys.
They recently completed a program, called Atlas, that is supported by the National Institute on Drug Abuse and is aimed at reducing steroid use among young male athletes.
A main element of the program, involving 3,200 male athletes at 31 high schools in Oregon and Washington, was to teach the students to educate one another on the problems.
The number of male students that reported having used steroids within a year was cut by 50 percent.
Under another National Institute of Drug Abuse grant, they are developing a similar program for girls.
Yesalis said the Goldberg-Elliot program was the only one he knew of that worked.
``Unless young people are taught to know where and how to draw the line, to know that it's not right to try to win at all costs, they're not going to listen when you tell them steroids put their lives at risk for the glory of winning,'' he said.
SAN FRANCISCO _ The threatened red-legged frog, which is believed to be the inspiration for Mark Twain's short story ``The Celebrated Jumping Frog of Calaveras County,'' is about to get extra protection from the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service.
Bowing to an order from U.S.
District Judge William Alsup of San Francisco, the agency on Friday proposed that 5.4 million acres in 31 California counties be designated as a critical habitat for the frog.
``It's the biggest area that we've ever designated in California,'' said Fish and Wildlife Service spokeswoman Patricia Foulk.
The red-legged frog reaches 5 inches in length and is the largest native frog in the West.
It breeds in wetlands, streams, ponds and stock ponds, but its historic range has diminished by 70 percent.
Just four areas in the state harbor more than 350 adult red-legged frogs.
The entire San Mateo County coast and most of West Marin, where some of the largest populations of red-legged frogs live, are designated as a critical habitat in the Fish and Wildlife Service proposal.
Critical habitat designation affects developers who need federal permits _ usually from the Army Corps of Engineers _ for their projects.
The Fish and Wildlife Service has to sign off on those permits, attesting that the development will not have an adverse effect on the threatened species, as defined by the Endangered Species Act.
Jeff Miller, a spokesman for the Center for Biological Diversity in Berkeley, said that a major pressure point where development and the red-legged frog may collide is in Contra Costa County where several big subdivisions along Danville and Tassajara creeks are in the works.
Fish and Wildlife Service spokeswoman Foulk said that designating a critical habitat for a threatened or endangered species isn't the same as establishing a preserve for it.
The agency can fine developers who knowingly trash a critical habitat, but as a practical matter, she said, mitigation measures such as altering the footprint of a development, or the land on which a building will be constructed, usually satisfy the agency's concerns.
Even though it is less of a protective measure than environmentalists would like, ``it's a positive step and might bring about the recovery of a listed species,'' Miller said.
The red-legged frog was listed as threatened in 1996 under the Endangered Species Act.
At that time, the Fish and Wildlife Service concluded that designating a critical habitat was ``not prudent,'' because it would not benefit the species and might make it more vulnerable to habitat vandalism and unauthorized collection.
Alsup disagreed.
Joining the Center for Biological Diversity as a plaintiff in the complaint against the Fish and Wildlife Service were the Jumping Frog Research Institute of Calaveras County and the Center for Sierra Nevada Conservation.
KUNMING, September 24 (Xinhua) --Local sources report that effective protection has been introduced to the Beihai Wetlands, Tengchong County, the only natural reserve of its kind in southwest China's Yunnan Province.
Wetlands, which are natural ecosystems with various species of flora and fauna, are noted for their great capacity to purge sewage and conserve water, according to experts.
Wetlands are thus ideal natural reserves and habitats for many rare species of wild plants and waterfowl.
The Beihai Wetlands Reserve covers about 2,000 hectares and is divided into two major sections --Beihai Marshland and Qinghai Lake, a freshwater lake used for irrigation.
The reserve is home to a wide variety of precious plants and bird species, and is the winter home for well over 1,000 migratory birds.
The Beihai Wetlands were placed under state protection in 1992, and Tengchong County has established a special agency and issued wide-ranging regulations to protect the area.
Planned afforestation has been carried out in the reserve and surrounding areas in recent years, with strict regulations in place to prohibit poaching.
The local governments at all levels have also extended great efforts to teach people to cherish the natural environment and protect wild animals and plants.
DENVER (AP) --The U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency on Friday ordered Vail Resorts to immediately begin efforts to restore a half-acre of wetlands illegally filled during construction of a dirt logging road.
It was just the latest episode in Vail Resorts' decades-long effort to complete a $14 million expansion project.
Environmental activists have set fires at the resort and recently lost a legal challenge over the expansion project's affect on wildlife, specifically the habitat of the lynx.
The logging road, built last fall to move heavy equipment and remove trees from the ski resort's new 885-acre area, was discovered earlier this year by U.S.
Forest Service employees.
Forest Service officials said it was causing excess sediment to flow into a water source below, and they ordered it closed in July.
The Army Corps of Engineers determined the road had violated the federal Clean Water Act.
If the EPA agrees, it could fine Vail up to $27,500 a day.
In 1996, Telluride ski area was fined $1.1 million for destroying 17 acres of wetlands.
The EPA on Friday ordered Vail Resorts to ``take action now'' to stabilize and winterize the road to protect the wetlands from further damage.
The order requires the road remained closed and sets an August 31 deadline to complete restoration.
Vail Resorts spokesman Porter Wharton III said recently that construction of the road over the wetlands was an honest mistake.
The road was realigned to miss one wetlands parcel and inadvertently affected another, he said.
CHANGSHA, December 11 (Xinhua) --Finland has agreed to help central China's Hunan Province improve biodiversity protection, environmental education, subtropical forestry and wetlands protection, according to provincial officials.
The province and Finland have established a cooperative committee and work plan focusing on environmental protection.
Finland and Hunan have cooperated in nature protection projects for over a decade.
Finland has funded a number of environmental protection projects in the province, and has exhibited special interest in flora and fauna protection programs.
HEFEI, December 16 (Xinhua) --East China's Anhui Province is working to seek international cooperation for protecting local wetland resources, which are shrinking in size and deteriorating, a threat posed by varied human factors.
The Huaihe River and the Yangtze, the longest in China, flow through Anhui province, helping form 3.8 million ha of wetlands locally, which accounts 27.8 percent of the national total.
This means that Anhui boasts the largest area of wetlands in the country.
Wetlands have comprehensive strong points, such as nurturing water sources, storing floodwater, regulating climate, as well as disposing of sewage, along with provision of a haven for wildlife, especially endangered water fowls.
The increasing population living in valleys of the Yangtze and Huaihe rivers in recent years, has accelerated the decrease and worsening of the wetlands, where a renowned home for rare and precious wildlife and plants like Chinese alligator, white dolphin, red-crowned crane, diatom and hornwort.
Though Anhui has begun to set up nature reserves for wetlands since 1982, it currently has only brought 4.6 percent of local wetlands under protection, because of technology and fund shortages.
The province intends to introduce overseas technology, facilities and money to do such research works on wetlands environment, waterfowl resources, and migratory birds.
BEIDAIHE (Hebei), March 5 (Xinhua) --China will enhance its international cooperation in protecting and reasonably utilizing the country's wetlands, said a Chinese official, who is attending an international symposium on wetlands and water birds protection.
China will cooperate with the International Wetlands Organization to evaluate, monitor, and manage the country's wetlands and make relevant policies, the official said.
He said that the symposium, which followed the establishment of China's office of the International Wetlands Organization, shows that the Chinese government is making further progress in protecting wetlands.
The office, set up in Beijing, will help China to make contact with other countries and organizations, work out the plan for wetlands protection and apply for international aid, said Chen Kelin, who heads the office.
Wetlands are a kind of ecosystem, including lakes and marshlands, with ecological and economic functions such as storing floodwater for use against drought.
China now has 63 million hectares of various kinds of wetlands, or 6.6 percent of the national total area and ranking first in Asia, among which some have been listed as "Wetlands of International Importance".
The symposium, which is held in Beidaihe, a sea-side resort in north China's Hebei Province, is jointly sponsored by the Chinese Ministry of Forestry, the Japan's Environmental Agency and the Asia-Pacific Branch of the Wetlands International.
The New York Times said in an editorial for Tuesday, March 7: Two successive presidents, George Bush and Bill Clinton, have promised to stop the steady erosion of the nation's wetlands _ the 100 million or so acres of swamps, marshes and fens that help prevent floods, filter harmful pollutants, provide habitat for endangered species and nourish tiny organisms essential to the food chain.
They have succeeded in beating back the big threats, including efforts by former Vice President Dan Quayle and, later, the Contract With America Republicans to transfer millions of these valuable acres to private interests almost overnight.
But they have been less successful in persuading the Army Corps of Engineers, which actually regulates wetlands, to take a harder line on developers and others who covet wetlands for commercial purposes.
Monday, however, the Corps announced new and stricter regulations that will make it much harder for developers to keep chewing up the country's wetlands in small bites.
The rules would require developers to secure a permit from the Corps for all projects affecting a half-acre of wetlands or more, down from the current minimum of three acres.
This change could make a big difference.
Though precise figures are elusive, wetlands are disappearing at a rate of about 70,000 to 100,000 acres a year, many of them lost to development on small parcels.
Regionally, the rules should benefit New York City's watershed, where thousands of acres essential to the purity of the city's water supply are threatened by small-scale development.
The new rules reflect steady pressure from the Clinton administration and from the Natural Resources Defense Council, an environmental group that took the Corps to court.
The rules also represent the Corps' second effort to soften the impact of an arcane but ecologically destructive rule known as Nationwide Permit 26.
Until three years ago, in the interests of administrative efficiency, Permit 26 had allowed the Corps to grant automatic permits to construction projects that affected less than 10 acres of wetlands.
In December 1996 the Corps dropped that limit to three acres.
But even these stricter standards have allowed the disappearance of 20,000 or more acres a year.
Several important steps remain.
Developers and contractors have denounced the new rules, and the administration must be ready to resist legislative attempts to overturn them.
Second, the Corps itself is under a heavy obligation to enforce the new rules in a fair-minded but hard-nosed way.
This will require careful scrutiny of thousands of individual development proposals that the Corps could ignore under the old rules.
The administration should make sure the Corps gets the money it needs for these additional enforcement responsibilities.
But for now, anyone who worries about wetlands has reason to cheer.
The Corps of Engineers, which is not known for environmental stewardship, has acted responsibly.
Despite President Clinton's promise to stop the destruction of the nation's wetlands, the US Army Corps of Engineers is rapidly retreating from enforcing the main law that protects streams, swamps, and marshes from filling and development, a review of the Corps' records indicates.
The Corps, one of two main federal agencies charged with protecting wetlands, has slashed inspections for possible violations by 40 percent since 1992, and in 1998 rejected only 3.2 percent of permit applications for major wetland projects.
In 1992, the Corps turned down 8.8 percent of such applications, according to the documents.
Beset by Congressional budget freezes as well as a headquarters goal of greater fairness to developers, Corps employees say they feel pressured to process applications quickly and, in at least one field office, they received a memo urging them to avoid time-consuming, costly enforcement actions.
Even in New England, regarded as one of the more vigilant Corps offices, the Corps regulatory budget has been frozen at $4.7 million since 1995, forcing staff reductions from 67 to 55.
During that period, wetland-filling applications increased by 8 percent as the region's economy prospered.
Senior Corps officials acknowledge that inspections and enforcement actions have dropped, but they say that partly reflects a society becoming sensitive to the need to protect wetlands, so there are fewer attempts to damage them.
In addition, they say the cutbacks reflect five years of budget freezes that have reduced the Corps regulatory staff from 1,150 to 1,050, forcing the agency to be more efficient, avoiding minor issues and allowing state regulators to do more.
``We believe we've substantially increased environmental protection over the past 10 years,'' said John Studet, chief of the headquarters regulatory branch of the Corps.
&QL; &QL; Employees critical &QL; &QL; But Corps employees say the agency has become so averse to enforcing regulations _ and so quick to issue permits _ that it has become a paper tiger easy to take advantage of.
``The Corps is withdrawing its presence in enforcement,'' said Magi Shapiro of Public Employees for Environmental Responsibility, who quit the Corps' Richmond office in 1996 rather than approve developments she felt should have been turned down.
``A program without enforcement is an invitation to break the law without consequences''.
The whistleblower organization, a seven-year-old advocacy group for government employees concerned about environmental issues, provided the Globe with summaries of enforcement records and other documents obtained from the Corps' 37 field offices under the Freedom of Information Act after employees complained of a precipitous drop in wetland protection at the Corps.
Grady McCallie, wetland ecologist for the National Wildlife Federation, said the Corps' enforcement decline could spell doom for thousands of acres of wetlands, especially in states that do not have strong enforcement programs.
He said New England states generally have good state enforcement, but, even there, a tough Corps can help stand up to powerful industries.
``If we could start a program from scratch, I certainly wouldn't organize it the way it is.
But given where we are, we would be in real bad shape'' if the Corps stops enforcing the law, McCallie said.
The controversy over the Corps occurs as the federal government tries to reverse centuries of destruction of wetlands, which are nursery and kitchen for countless plants and animals.
Americans destroyed nearly 30 percent of all wetlands before realizing that these swamps and marshes protect humans, too, by absorbing floodwaters and trapping pollutants that might otherwise reach tap water.
&QL; &QL; Clinton steps in &QL; &QL; The United States still loses more than 100,000 acres a year of wetlands, but Clinton hopes to reverse the trend by 2005, creating 100,000 acres more than are destroyed.
The main tool would be the restoration of wetlands that were damaged in the past, such as the Florida Everglades.
The administration, however, puts modest resources into the two agencies charged with protecting wetlands that exist: the Corps of Engineers and the Environmental Protection Agency, which together share responsibility for enforcing the federal Clean Water Act that governs wetland development.
The EPA has only 26 people nationwide in its technical wetland enforcement division, including one full-time employee based in Boston.
At the Corps, Clinton has repeatedly asked for $11 million more for regulation of wetlands than the $106 million approved by Congress this year, a reflection of conservatives' belief that the Corps is often an obstacle to development.
However, even if the White House received more money, Clinton does not plan to beef up enforcement significantly.
Almost half of the extra money would fund a new appeal system to allow businesses and individuals to challenge Corps decisions.
Compounding the Corps' budget problems, the agency is far less comfortable in the enforcer role than the EPA.
The Corps, best known as the builder of public works and flood control projects, objected to regulating wetlands when the Clean Water Act passed in 1972 and, in recent years, the agency seldom goes to court because of a violation.
Now, in addition to few fines and lawsuits, the Corps has also cut back on other kinds of enforcement, according to the Public Employees for Environmental Responsibility review.
Orders to restore illegally damaged wetlands have fallen from 283 to 109 since 1992, while field inspections have dropped from 8,149 to 5,141 in the same period.
``It's only a matter of time before people find out,'' one Corps employee said.
``What's the use of getting a permit if people can do it without a permit''?
A memo for Corps employees in Salt Lake City, obtained by the whistleblowers, even issued guidelines for what enforcement cases to avoid.
According to the memo, Corps officials ``will normally do nothing further'' if they cannot determine from the office that a reported violation is substantial.
Even with some major violations, the memo urges the Corps to ``end its involvement with the case'' if another agency will not take over.
&QL; &QL; Work overload &QL; &QL; New England Corps officials received no such memo, but the office has eliminated its separate enforcement division and begun transferring more cases to the EPA Boston office, which is overwhelmed with more than 200 tips a year to be investigated by one full-time and one part-time staff member.
But Studet of the Corps said the workload shift to the EPA makes sense because the EPA has broader enforcement powers, a bigger legal team, and a formal agreement with the Corps to handle prosecution of flagrant cases.
More generally, Studet says critics' fixation on enforcement overlooks big improvements at the Corps.
For instance, he said the Corps has toughened regulations since 1996, requiring that wetland damage as small as one-third of an acre receive a Corps permit, three times smaller than the previous minimum size.
He also said the Corps has greatly increased the requirement that developers offset damage to wetlands by creating new ones.
Last year, the Corps ordered 47,000 acres of new wetlands, which is more than the 31,000 acres they allowed to be damaged.
``The (Clinton) goal is 100,000 acres gain by 2005.
Our part of that is that we believe we should continue to administer the program so we have no net loss'' of wetlands, Studet said.
However, researchers have cast doubt on the value of wetlands created by developers: A University of Massachusetts study shows half of them fail.
Moreover, critics note, the wetland damage Studet cites does not include illegal activity.
&QL; &QL; Criticism of Corps &QL; &QL; Officials at Public Employees for Environmental Responsibility said the underlying problem is that the Corps is so afraid of controversy it bends over backward for powerful industries.
Even in the Concord office of the Corps, which the whistleblowers agree is more vigilant than others, they found evidence of yielding to political pressure.
Whistleblowers point to an internal Corps memo in which one Corps official boasted that the agency has done little to slow the rapid growth of the powerful cranberry industry in Maine, which has lobbied Congress for easier rules to allow flooding wetlands for the crop.
The memo notes that all 29 permits had been promptly granted and that only one grower had to create new wetlands to offset the damage.
New England regulatory chief William Lawless counters that each project received proper review before it was approved, saying critics ``are rushing to judgment.
We certainly were knowledgeable that the state was interested in cranberries, but that doesn't mean we are going to roll over.
We are very careful not to give special treatment''.
In truth, Lawless said, his office has done its best to keep up wetland protection even as budget freezes forced him to eliminate 12 positions during the last four years.
``We're doing more with less,'' he said.
BEIJING, February 2 (Xinhua) --Xu Youfang, the Minister of Forestry, delivered a written statement today to mark the first "International Wetlands' Day" designated by the international wetlands organization.
He vowed in the statement that China will make further efforts in the protection of wetland resources.
Wetlands, a kind of important natural ecological system and known as the earth's "kidney", play an unreplaceable role in climate adjusting, water conserving, soil-erosion preventing and pollutant resolving in addition to serving as habitats for a variety of the world's rare water fowls.
China has a total area of more than 25 million hectares of natural and artificial wetlands of different types scattered across the country, with many being waterfowl habitats of international importance.
"History has told us that the protection of wetlands represents the protection of ourselves, for the destruction of wetlands means the destruction of man's living environment," the minister said.
Xu said his Ministry will launch a drive to enhance the awareness of wetland protection among the public, establish a dynamic monitoring network and information system for China's wetlands, conduct scientific research in wetland protection as well as proper utilization and management of wetlands resources.
Thus far, China has set up more than 130 wetland nature reserves, six of which have been listed as of "international importance", according to the minister.
VAIL, Colo.
(AP) --A temporary dirt logging road carved across a half-acre of wetlands has landed Vail Resorts, the nation's largest ski area, in trouble with the government.
Last fall, Tom Allender, resort planning director, and his crews built the road to access an 885-acre expansion into undeveloped backcountry.
Until the Army Corps of Engineers realized what the resort had done in July, no one noticed the temporary road had been built in the wrong spot and was spilling sediment into protected habitat.
The Environmental Protection Agency launched an investigation last month.
The resort could be looking at civil fines of up to $27,500 a day if the EPA determines the road is a violation of the Clean Water Act, which requires permits for construction through wetlands to protect migratory birds and other fauna.
Vail Resorts has said it was an honest mistake.
But the EPA's Steve Ireland rejected that defense.
``If fill material is discharged into the waters of the United States without a permit, it is a violation,'' he said.
``It's worse if they knew they were breaking the law, but whether it was unintentional doesn't change anything''.
In the meantime, the Corps of Engineers has closed the road, leaving the resort with more than a million board-feet of cut timber and no way to remove it.
It may have to be burned on site.
The U.S.
Forest Service had ordered Vail to build the road so logging trucks could remove the timber without rumbling through the tourist-clogged village.
Allender said he became confused when building it because surveyors had left three proposed routes marked with ribbons through the wilderness.
The road is another chapter in the decades-long, controversial effort by Vail Resorts to complete a $14 million expansion project.
Environmentalists recently lost a legal challenge to the project, arguing unsuccessfully that the Forest Service didn't adequately assess the effect on wildlife, specifically the lynx.
Last fall, a group calling itself Earth Liberation Front claimed responsibility for an outbreak of fires at the resort that caused $12 million in damage.
In addition to any fine, Vail Resorts will have to pay to fix the damage to the wetlands.
KAMPALA, February 2 (Xinhua) --Uganda has made progress in protecting its wetlands since an international convention on wetlands was ratified by the country in 1988.
The convention, an inter-governmental treaty launched at Ramsar, Iran, on February 2, 1971, partly aims to the conservation of wetlands as habitats for migratory water birds and enhance international cooperation in the field.
The day, adopted by a conference on wetlands held in Brisbane, Austria in March 1996 as World Wetlands Day, was marked with a theme "Wetlands and Community" in Masaka District, 120 kilometers southwest of capital Kampala today.
In compliance with the convention, Uganda has made efforts to raise awareness of the public about uses of wetlands and the need of conservation.
The country has also developed a national wetlands policy, including the designation of Lake George's wetland, southwestern Uganda as a convention site, the research and evaluation of wetlands for facilitating their wise use.
The authorities, in February, 1996, set up a hot line for the public to report environment abuse and announced that new draining of swamps for economic development is no longer allowed in the country.
Meanwhile, the Netherlands offered Uganda funds for restoring some swamps in the country.
Uganda's wetlands cover an area of about 29,600 square kilometers and make for 12 percent of the country's territory.
The wetlands play a role as filters of waste before it drains into lakes and rivers in the eastern African country.
However, Uganda's wetlands has decreased in acreage, mainly due to human activities including grazing, brick-making, reduced vegetation, rice planting and hunting especially of antelopes and water birds.
Large tracts of wetlands in the country currently have been drained into paddy fields.
In Kampala and Kabale District bordering on Rwanda, many swampy areas have been drained for farming and house construction.
enditem =02021451 =02021455 NNNN 22:54 22:55 g # PAB
CANBERRA, March 20 (Xinhua) --The formation of a new International conservation body announced today was vital to the wise use of wetlands around the world, conservationists were told at the Ramsar meeting today.
The Wetlands International was launched at the Ramsar Convention conference held in Brisbane, a port city in Northeastern Australia, with the participation of some 1000 delegates from about 120 countries, The Australian Associated Press reported.
The new organization links the Asian Wetland Bureau, Wetlands for the Americas and the International Waterfowl and Wetlands Research Bureau.
Australian Environment Minister Robert Hill, while addressing the conference, said that it represented a unique partnership between government and non-government interests to work for the goal of wetlands conservation.
Hill told the conference that relations between Wetlands International and Australia have been strengthened to the point that a formal agreement would be signed tomorrow.
Asian delegates to the international Ramsar conference called on the governing bureau to cut costs and move its headquarters out of Switzerland to the developing world.
Swami Singh Boparai, the Asian regional representative, said that as the infrastructure is available less costly in the developing world, the bureau secretariat can consider moving to a developing country so that it can have within the same budget more manpower and more activity.
Boparai also said that wetlands in many developing countries were vital to the sustenance of human beings, not just flora and fauna.
Malaysia has estimated that its wetlands contributed 10 percent of its GDP although this percentage may have declined slightly as industrialization increased, he said.
The Ramsar Convention, signed in 1971 in Ramsar, Iran, has more than 90 signatory countries which make contributions to the administrative bureau based in Switzerland.
Previous Ramsar conferences have been held in Italy, France, the Netherlands, Canada, Switzerland and Japan.
The vital importance of wetlands to Asia has led India to bid to host the next Ramsar meeting in New Delhi in 1999.
BEIDAIHE, March 4 (Xinhua) --Conserving China's wetlands is a national priority, said Zhen Rende, director of the wildlife and forestry department of the Ministry of Forestry.
Headed by the ministry, 17 ministries and commissions are formulating the systematic action program to guide the country's conservation and use of wetlands, Zhen said.
Speaking at the International Workshop on Wetlands which opened today in this sea-side resort in north China's Hebei Province, he announced that the program includes the establishment of wetlands nature reserves, protection of species, spreading of scientific findings and training of personnel.
Wetlands, an important natural ecological system known as the earth's "kidney" include marshland, lakes, rivers and other shallow water land.
The wetlands are necessary for water conservation, flood prevention, adjusting weather and maintaining the varieties of organisms.
In 1992 China joined the Convention on Wetlands that was established in Ramsar, Iran in 1971.
To collect the comprehensive information on China's wetlands resources, China has organized several large-scale investigations in the past few years and ran several training classes in Jiangxi, Shandong provinces and Inner Mongolia Autonomous Regions for the administration of wetlands.
According to official statistics, China has more than 63 million hectares of wetlands, accounting for 11.9 percent of the world's total.
Zhen said, for quite a long time, many people believed that the wetlands were useless mud.
Now more and more people have recognized wetlands' great ecological and economic potential and the conservation and utilization of wetlands has become an urgent task.
The four-day International Workshop on Wetland, sponsored by China's Ministry of Forestry, Japan's Environment Agency and Wetlands International will also arrange investigation of wetlands and water birds in Beidaihe.
WASHINGTON (AP) --After years of deliberations, the Clinton administration next week will impose tougher requirements on developers to stem the loss of ecologically sensitive wetlands, according to sources familiar with the new regulations.
Homebuilders said Friday the new rules are unneeded and will stall economic development, but environmentalists welcomed the tighter restrictions, saying construction under old rules led to the loss of thousands of acres of wetlands.
The U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers scheduled a news conference for Monday to announce the new rules, which have been debated internally for more than four years and were spurred by an environmental group's lawsuit.
The new requirements will take effect in June, according to the Army Corps' final draft.
The 172-page regulatory overall will require developers to seek special, individual permits to build if they want to fill in a wetland of one-half acre or more.
Prior to a lawsuit by the Natural Resources Defense Council in 1996, the cutoff was 10 acres, a standard the Army Corps later reduced to three acres.
The new regulations also will end developers' use of a streamlined ''nationwide permit'' process for most construction, meaning that specific permits will have to be approved for each project.
Homebuilders have complained that this new process will delay construction and require unnecessarily stringent review.
They argue that more wetlands are being created through their efforts to form new ones than are lost to the bulldozers.
Robert Mitchell, a Maryland builder who is president of the National Association of Home Builders, predicted ''a dramatic negative effect on the homebuilding industry'' because of delays and more stringent wetlands protection requirements.
A study commissioned by a group of landowners and developers and the National Association of Counties estimated the cost to the economy of the new permitting process at $300 million a year.
However, the Army Corps has estimated the additional cost at closer to $26 million.
Since the Bush administration, the government has had a goal of having no net loss of wetlands, trying to reverse decades of disappearing wetland acres.
Although specific numbers are in dispute, environmentalists say the country, nevertheless, is losing as much as 100,000 acres of wetlands annually.
They maintain a fifth of those losses have been due to the Army Corps building permit policies.
Environmentalists have sought for years to abolish the so-called nationwide Permit 26, which applies to development, including home construction and road building, and replace it with individual permits as the Army Corps now is going to do.
David Rosenberg, an attorney for the Natural Resources Defense Council, said the nationwide permitting system amounted to giving ''rubber-stamp'' approval to construction projects.
''It has been the single largest source of permitted wetlands destruction in the country,'' Rosenberg said in an interview.
But the National Association of Home Builders argues that wetland mitigation by developers actually restored more wetlands than were lost under the nationwide permit system.
At the same time, the group argues, the nationwide permitting system has allowed for fast track approval of thousands of projects without environmental damage.
The average time to get an individual permit approved was more than a year, compared with about a month for the streamlined nationwide permit for construction projects, the group estimated.
The new reliance on individual permits, with a one-half-acre wetlands threshold, ''means more regulations, delays and costs, less flexibility'' for developers, said Mitchell.
WHITE PLAINS, N.Y.
(AP) - The Army Corps of Engineers tightened its regulations Thursday on development in the New York City watershed, requiring a full public review of almost any large project.
Under the Clean Water Act, the corps has jurisdiction over any project that involves the discharge of fill or dredged material into waterways, which include rivers, streams, ponds and wetlands.
Thursday's action by its New York district suspends some of the permit procedures that are in effect elsewhere in the country.
''I don't want to say there was a full consensus, but there was a general feeling in New York, even in some towns that are more pro-development, that people wanted more protection in the New York City watershed,'' said Joe Seebode, chief of the district's regulatory branch.
The watershed affects the drinking water for New York City as well as parts of the northern suburbs.
The new rules also apply to the Great Swamp in Putnam and Dutchess counties, some Hudson River wetlands and other New York waters, he said.
''This will affect projects that are having anything more than an extremely minimal impact on wetlands and watercourses,'' he said.
The new rules require: -Public notice and public comment before a permit is granted.
-An analysis of whether there are less environmentally damaging alternatives.
-Mitigation of any impact on wetlands by creating or enhancing other wetlands.
''It does not mean people will not be able to develop, but it does mean that folks will have to come in, get an individual permit, give the corps the opportunity to coordinate with the city, the state, federal agencies and the general public on whether there is a reason not to authorize that project,'' Seebode said.
''We are interested in using our regulatory responsibility and authority to minimize the impact on wetlands in the watershed because they are so important in filtering out pollutants and purifying water and trapping sediments.''
IMPERIAL, Calif.
(AP) --It is known as one of the nation's dirtiest waterways, an 80-mile drain that catches raw sewage and industrial waste from the Mexican border city of Mexicali and mixes it with agricultural runoff from the irrigated fields of the Imperial Valley.
But after years of hand-wringing and bad publicity, the New River is getting the kind of attention that could end its notoriety.
A federally financed project to create artificial wetlands that would cleanse millions of gallons of river water is nearing completion, and the U.S. and Mexican governments last month announced $50 million in financing for badly needed upgrades to the Mexicali sewage treatment system.
The combination could go a long way to removing much of the pesticides, fertilizers, raw sewage carried by the river into the Salton Sea, the largest lake in California.
''Eventually, with what we're doing and what they're doing we'll clean up a lot of the problems with this river,'' said Leon Lesicka, a lifelong Imperial Valley resident and chairman of a task force coordinating river cleanup projects.
Signs of significant improvement in the river could be less than four years away, said Eugenia McNaughton, an environmental scientist with the Environmental Protection Agency.
''This is a workable problem and we are working on it,'' McNaughton said.
So far, the progress is visible only along the river's banks at two sites near Imperial and Brawley, about 100 miles east of San Diego, where workers are carving berms and ponds for the artificial wetlands.
After pumping Colorado River water into the area, workers will plant bull rushes and other wetland plants.
They won't use New River water out of concern for the workers' health, Lesicka said.
For now, the river remains a fetid mess, especially near the border at Calexico, where clumps of foam and debris bob on the surface and the river gives off an acrid smell and burns the eyes and throat after a few minutes of exposure.
Illegal immigrants float down the river to avoid the Border Patrol, knowing agents are reluctant to follow them in.
Polio, tetanus and tuberculosis have all been found in the river, according to the Imperial Irrigation District, the valley's main water agency.
The river was formed from Colorado River flooding between 1904 and 1906.
Waters breached a canal and turned a usually dry creek bed into a river that flows from about 20 miles south of Mexicali to the Salton Sea, a lake with no natural outlets that is choking on its high salinity.
Congress approved $3.75 million for the artificial wetlands to filter the contaminated water through a process known as bioremediation.
An additional $25 million of federal funding through the North American Development Bank is the U.S. contribution to the sewer upgrade in Mexicali, a city that has grown to an estimated 1 million.
The Imperial Irrigation District, which also is part of the task force and is building part of the wetlands, will consider adding more wetlands sites to help filter the water, possibly expanding to the nearby Alamo River, another Salton Sea tributary, said agency spokeswoman Sue Giller.
In the artificial wetlands being built, water will flow into collection ponds, where silt and minerals will settle to the bottom, then pass through a series of reed-covered berms before returning to the river again.
Biologists will monitor the collection ponds over three years to see how they affect wildlife.
There's no easy way to explain why the cleanup has taken so long, said Marie Barrett, a biologist involved with the project and a lifelong valley resident.
''Once we realized we had a problem, it took us a long time to get going,'' she said.
''But now we're actually doing something and it's so exciting''.
----- On the Net: EPA: www. epa.gov
WASHINGTON (AP) --New regulations that will make it harder to build roads or homes near wetlands are set to be issued by the Army Corps of Engineers to curtail destruction of the ecologically sensitive areas.
The Corps completed a 172-page overhaul of its wetlands regulations this week and is ready to issue the new requirements, according to government and private sources.
The Corps scheduled a news conference on the regulations for Monday.
But sources familiar with the regulations, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said today final release may be delayed because of some technical changes.
The new regulations have been in the works for more than four years, but were given new impetus 18 months ago when President Clinton said he wanted to tighten the requirements on developers ''to ensure that we think twice before building in our most sensitive wetlands''.
According to sources who have seen the new regulations, the Corps will require developers to obtain specific permits for projects affecting at least a half-acre of wetlands, compared to three acres under current regulations.
The restriction was reduced from 10 acres in December 1996.
The new regulations will replace a ''nationwide permit'' system for developers that environmentalists argue provided too many loopholes to builders and led to widespread wetlands destruction.
Statistics on wetlands loss vary widely.
Environmentalists say more than 100,000 acres of wetlands continue to be lost each year, about a fifth of that associated with the less stringent national permit system.
Those figures are disputed by the National Home Builders Association, which argues that wetland mitigation by developers actually restored more wetlands than were lost by construction under the nationwide permit system.
The new regulations would cover about one-fourth of all wetlands.
Daniel Rosenberg, an attorney at the Natural Resources Defense Council, which filed a lawsuit that spurred the new regulations, said the tighter standards are long overdue in strengthening wetlands protection.
The Corps first began reviewing the wetlands rules in 1995 and 1996.
'The nationwide permit has been used to destroy thousands of acres of wetlands,'' said Rosenberg, calling it the most significant reason for mass wetlands loss over the years.
Meanwhile, homebuilders and the National Association of Counties have accused the Corps of overreaction.
There is ''little evidence to justify'' the abandonment of the nationwide permit system, and the tighter half-acre restriction is not needed, said the National Association of Home Builders.
''In 1998 alone, Corps statistics show that under the (nationwide) permit program landowners provided 6,304 acres in mitigation in exchange for permission to fill or otherwise impact 2,974 acres''.
said Neil Gaffney, NAHB spokesman.
The Corps' completion of the new rules was first reported in today's Washington Post.
HANOI, February 24 (Xinhua) --Vietnam and the World Bank (WB) signed here on Thursday two development credit agreements for Vietnam's coastal wetlands protection and development project and the rural transport project in amounts of 31.8 million U.S. dollars and 103.9 million U.S. dollars respectively.
Signatures were Governor of the State Bank of Vietnam (SBV) Le Duc Thuy and President of WB James Wolfensohn.
The Coastal Wetlands Protection and Development Project will assist Vietnam to reestablish and improve the coastal mangrove wetlands ecosystems in order to protect sustainable aquatic nurturing and coastal protection functions.
The project also aims at improving the agricultural productivity, aquatic nurturing and other related industries of the country.
The Rural Transport Project will assist Vietnam to improve and upgrade the rural transport access network at 40 provinces and improve the access of the rural communities to the urban communities, develop the central and provincial capacity to improve and sustain the level of service of the rural transport road network.
The two credit agreements raised the total amount of the loans that WB has approved to 2.4 billion U.S. dollars in the form of 25 projects and programs.
The World Bank resumed lending to Vietnam in November 1993.
A WB delegation led by its president, Wolfensohn is scheduled to conclude its three-day visit to Vietnam on Thursday.
This is Wolfensohn's second visit to Vietnam after the first one in May 1996, soon after he became the president of the World Bank.
The WB delegation's Asia-tour includes Japan, Thailand, Indonesia, Vietnam and the Philippines, aiming to prepare for an operation strategy for the World Bank in the 21st century.
NEW YORK _ The federal government announced Thursday tougher restrictions for building on wetlands within the New York City watershed.
The stricter rules, involving wetlands as small as one-tenth of an acre, will mainly affect Westchester, Putnam and Dutchess counties, said Joseph Seebode, an official with the Army Corps of Engineers.
The new rules require developers to obtain federal permits for any construction projects, including individual homes, on wetlands.
Slivers of wetlands, added together, can contribute to a region's water quality, said Jeffrey Odefey of Riverkeeper, a Hudson River environmental organization.
``These are critical little pieces,'' he said.
``There are lots of them, and together they provide filtration and flood control.
They may seem like a puddle in somebody's backyard, but if it's near stream headwaters, it can affect the quality of the drinking water system''.
Environmental organizations and the New York City Council have been lobbying for stronger federal protection of wetlands around the 1,969 square miles of watershed for months.
In the vast watershed region west of the Hudson River, federal regulations, adopted last spring _ and tougher than previous ones _ will continue to apply.
TRENTON, N.J.
(AP) - A Burlington County Republican leader who used 22 acres of protected wetland in the Pinelands to expand harvesting operations may soon be off the hook.
Garfield DeMarco, former Burlington County GOP chairman and a generous contributor to state Republican causes, has applied for a newly created state permit that would give the expansion after-the-fact state approval.
DeMarco undertook a 33-acre bog expansion in 1998, but 22 of the acres were protected under the New Jersey Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act.
By law, DeMarco should have sought a state permit before undertaking the expansion.
The state Department of Environmental Protection sent a letter in October 1998 to DeMarco, alerting him of the violation.
Fines for the illegal destruction of wetlands can be as high as $10,000 per day.
At that rate, the potential penalty now exceeds $8 million.
DeMarco's attorney, Anthony Drollas, said DEP officials have given no indication that they plan to impose anywhere near the maximum potential penalty against the cranberry grower.
DEP spokesman Peter Page said the department is negotiating with DeMarco over how much to assess in penalties, but he said DeMarco could have been eligible for a state permit had he sought one.
Not everyone is happy with DeMarco's possible settlement.
Critics say DeMarco is a well-connected political figure in the state.
DEP Commissioner Robert C.
Shinn is a Burlington County native and a political protege of DeMarco's.
Page said Shinn has excused himself from the case, citing appearance of a potential conflict.
Glenn Paulsen, chairman of the Burlington County GOP, is manager of the Trenton office of Capehart &AMP; Scatchard, the law firm representing DeMarco's application.
State records show DeMarco and the legal and engineering firms involved in his permit application gave GOP campaigns more than $200,000 last year.
Since 1995, the firms have given New Jersey Republicans $517,000 - including $196,000 from DeMarco between 1995 and 1999.
''Frankly, I think this is special-interest money and special-interest regulatory privilege,'' Bill Neil, director of the conservation for the New Jersey Audubon Society, told The Star-Ledger of Newark for Saturday's editions.
''This is a sorry chapter in New Jersey policy history''.
Drollas said DeMarco's political ties have nothing to do with the application.
Under the permit created in April, the 47 cranberry growers in the Pinelands would be entitled to expand bogs to a collective maximum of 300 acres of wetlands over the next five years.
Wetlands in the Pinelands and throughout the state are supposed to be off limits to development because of their value as a wildlife habitat and a water cleansing system.
Each grower is limited to a maximum wetlands expansion of 10 acres in any year.
That means DeMarco's 22-acre expansion will have to be phased in under permits issued over the next three years.
NEW YORK _ After repeated efforts to persuade the federal government to strictly limit building on marshes around New York City's upstate reservoirs, the Giuliani administration reversed itself this week, saying the wetlands needed no special protections.
The city's new position echoes the views of Republican officials from rural communities around the reservoirs and pits city officials against private environmental groups and the federal Environmental Protection Agency, which say that special restrictions are needed because wetlands help to purify the city's water.
The change was outlined in a March 15 letter from Environmental Protection Commissioner Joel Miele to the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers, which is updating federal rules for wetlands.
Some environmental groups and Democratic city officials assailed the move and accused Giuliani of putting his possible race for the Senate, and his need for Republican support outside the city, ahead of his responsibility to protect the water supply.
Joseph Lhota, the deputy mayor for operations, denied there was any political motive behind the change.
One of Miele's deputies made the original recommendations, and Miele never approved them, Lhota said.
Lhota defended the city's new stance, saying the city's water supply was already sufficiently protected from pollution.
``Anyone who makes the argument that these new rules would protect the watershed any further, that's just false and cheap politics,'' he said.
The city reversed its stance on the new restrictions after the original recommendations angered Republican state legislators and county officials, who called Giuliani and Miele to complain that tighter rules would stifle development.
(STORY CAN END HERE.
OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS) Without a strong recommendation by the city for special rules around the reservoirs, several environmental lawyers said, the stricter standard are less likely to be adopted by the Army Corps of Engineers, particularly because upstate communities have sent the agency extensive comments of their own, opposing such a move.
The agency is responsible for issuing permits for filling in small tracts of wetlands and thus can limit development.
``It's an extreme and radical action to withdraw recommendations like this,'' said Robert F.
Kennedy Jr.
, a lawyer for Riverkeeper, an environmental group that strongly supported the Giuliani administration two years ago when it committed to an ambitious plan to protect the water supply.
``We're worried that water quality is being traded for political advantage,'' he said.
Since last summer, the corps has been updating its nationwide system for issuing permits to fill wetlands, seeking to identify areas where wetlands are particularly vulnerable or important and need protection.
The city's original written comments, by Dr.
William Stasiuk, a deputy commissioner of the city Department of Environmental Protection in charge of the water supply, recommended that the strictest procedures be applied to proposals for developing the 2,000 square miles that drain into the reservoirs, with individual applications required for any filling or construction affecting more than one-third of an acre of wetlands.
The general standard used by the Federal agency requires an application and review only for any project filling more than three acres of wetlands.
Stasiuk said extra protection was needed because ``further loss or degradation of the remaining wetlands in the watersheds may jeopardize regional water quality''.
But when his comments were circulated in upstate communities last month, local officials called them a ``sneak attack'' on the rights of residents around the reservoirs to develop their property.
Stasiuk declined to comment Thursday.
In recent days, several city officials sent Giuliani letters criticizing the retraction of Stasiuk's original wetlands recommendations.
In their letters, they said the city's reversal increased the chances that the water supply would slowly be degraded, eventually forcing the city to build a $6 billion filtration plant to remove pollution that could have been prevented.
The EPA has no say in the final decision on wetlands rules by the corps, but has indicated that the wetlands around the reservoirs deserve special protection.
In an interview Thursday, Miele defended the change in the city's position, saying there was no need to saddle communities in the watershed with extra federal restrictions because his staff already had the right to stop any action that might pollute the water.
Even so, Miele acknowledged that the city's options were somewhat limited.
Two years ago, it signed an agreement with communities around the reservoirs that ended their longstanding legal challenges to the city's pollution regulations around the watersheds.
In return, the city began spending hundreds of millions of dollars to help the communities keep the water clean, and it acknowledged their right to continue to grow economically.
PHOENIX _ There's a place in the far southwest Phoenix area where you can see a great blue heron &UR; picking its way along the waterline, or an egret gliding overhead.
Beavers cross one trail.
Turtles and a melodious marsh wren find homes near another.
``We came here at sunset and it was like a scene from `National Geographic,' '' one visitor, Lynn Timmons, said after a look.
``It's the desert.
You don't expect to see this kind of scenery''.
Especially when it's next to a sewage treatment plant and drawing its water from the plant's discharge.
The site is Tres Rios, a 12-acre wetlands project downstream from the Phoenix area's 91st Avenue Wastewater Treatment Plant.
But it is more than a sanctuary for nearly 100 species of birds and wildlife from javelinas to bobcats.
It's an extension of the plant itself, using nature as a filter to provide the final cleaning stage for sewer water.
The concept could end up saving cities in the Phoenix area hundreds of millions of dollars.
The reason: Increased federal standards are expected for water being released back into the environment.
Phoenix officials say the cost to upgrade a treatment plant such as the one at 91st Avenue to meet those new standards could top $375 million.
``With a wetlands, we can do a full 800 acres for about $85 million,'' said Bing Brown, spokesman for Phoenix's Water Services Department.
``It does the same thing, and does it better in some cases.
``Do you want to put up another building, or do you want a place you can take your family to watch birds and watch lizards?
If both do about the same thing but one costs less and looks better, it seems it's a shoo-in''.
Before a city creates 800 acres of wetlands, though, it needs to know whether the concept works.
That led to Tres Rios, a demonstration project near 91st Avenue and Broadway Road.
Wastewater is processed through the nearby treatment plant and pumped into the wetlands.
As the water flows through plants and vegetation, ``nature takes its course,'' cleansing the water of nitrogen, metals, pesticides and the like.
The water is collected on the other end.
Water that comes out of the plant is not used for drinking but for irrigation and to cool towers at the Palo Verde Nuclear Generating Station.
&UR; Jack Landy, an environmental engineer with the Environmental Protection Agency in San Francisco, said the EPA supports Tres Rios and is impressed with the planning going into the project.
There are other wetlands projects, including one in Show Low and a couple in Tucson, but he said there's nothing on such a large scale in this region, including Arizona, California, Nevada or Hawaii.
``We have enough experience with wetlands, though, that we're confident it can work,'' he said.
A concern already expressed in meetings is the possibility of mosquito breeding, but Landy said he hopes that can be prevented.
``We're going to be supportive but attentive as to the environmental impacts,'' he said.
The EPA has not identified any significant pollution from the discharge at this point, he added.
Construction of the 12-acre site began in 1995.
About $8.5 million has been spent or committed so far from the federal government and cities involved.
Tres Rios is owned by a coalition of Phoenix, Scottsdale, Glendale, Mesa and Tempe.
It is operated in partnership with the Bureau of Reclamation.
Officials of the cities say the project is more successful than they anticipated, and they are pushing to build the 800 acres of wetlands.
The Army Corps of Engineers is studying the feasibility of the larger project; the study is expected to be completed by May 2000.
The project would span an area near the Salt, Gila and Agua Fria rivers, which is how it got the name Tres Rios, Spanish for ``three rivers''.
The 800-acre wetlands could have four different types of areas, including ponds, marshes, streams and an area where the water would flow underground.
The lessons learned from the smaller demonstration project would help the cities operate the full-scale wetlands, says Roland Wass, research project manager at Tres Rios.
Lessons like, watch out for the beavers.
Up to a dozen now call Tres Rios home, including Brutus, who weighs an estimated 70 pounds but still is slippery enough to avoid getting caught.
He's been busy building dams and dropping a 35-foot tree in the middle of one of the ponds.
``When we started, we never anticipated beavers,'' Wass said.
``Now it's a problem, but we're learning how to deal with it''.
The most important result of Tres Rios could be improved wastewater at a fraction of the cost of what it would take to build upgraded treatment plants.
And there's the benefit that isn't financial.
``Twenty-five years down the road,'' Wass said, ``you have usable real estate, not rusting chemical tanks''.
&QL; Chris Fiscus can be reached at (602) 444-7942 or at chris.fiscus(at)pni.com via e-mail. &QL;
NEWARK, N.J.
_ Cranberry farmers have been quietly expanding into more and more unregulated acreage, even as they have sought federal approval to use sensitive wetlands, environmental groups assert.
The accusation came as one of the state's largest growers, A.R.
DeMarco Enterprises, was charged this month with illegally expanding into 22 acres of regulated wetlands in Burlington County.
That charge by the state Department of Environmental Protection _ which could mean heavy fines for the owner, Garfield DeMarco, a former Burlington County Republican leader _ cast further suspicion on the industry in the eyes of some environmental groups.
The $25-million-a-year cranberry industry has thrived for over 200 years in the state's pinelands on the fringes of natural wetlands, where swampy conditions and a web of streams, dams and ditches allow farmers to flood growing areas easily and cheaply with the water that is essential to the crop.
As a result, New Jersey, the most urban and densely populated state in the country, has become the third-largest cranberry producer, behind Massachusetts and Wisconsin.
And many people see the farming of cranberries, as well as blueberries, both of which depend on clean water, as compatible with, and indeed an aid to, wetlands preservation.
The growers say they need to expand into regulated wetlands to remain competitive.
But William Neil, director of conservation for the New Jersey Audubon Society, asserts that cranberry growers have already been working far more than the 3,500 acres that they have cited in their expansion applications.
He said that reports on pesticide use suggested that as much as 4,481 acres of cranberries were being grown in the state, and that other statistics from the state Department of Agriculture put the figure at put the figure at 3,900 acres.
Steven Lee, one of the state's 48 cranberry growers and a spokesman for the group, denied any deception.
He said that he and other growers had always indicated that they were modestly expanding into unregulated, upland areas and into blueberry bogs on their land.
Those expansions had added as much as 400 acres to the state's cranberry inventory in recent years, he conceded, which would put the total at about 3,900 acres.
``But we have done it on our farm to the maximum extent possible without touching regulated wetlands,'' Lee said.
``This is true of most of the other farmers.
We are all tapped out''.
He said the growers, most of whom are part of the large Ocean Spray cooperative, had not hidden expansions from the public, as Neil asserted.
He said they had always told regulators that they were converting blueberry bogs to more lucrative cranberry production wherever possible, and extending growing areas upland, away from the wetlands, when it did not require extensive redirection of water.
The accusations by Neil came about three weeks after the state and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency said that they were close to approving conditions under which growers could expand into 300 acres of wetlands over the next five years without seeking specific permission for each expansion as they had in the past.
The draft agreement on what is called the ``general permit'' could be approved later this month.
But it is being opposed by the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service as ``the most environmentally damaging proposal'' considered by regulators over the last five years.
Echoing this sentiment, environmental groups like the Audubon Society have asked federal environmental regulators to reconsider their support.
WASHINGTON _ The Clinton administration Thursday proposed new rules to protect environmentally sensitive wetlands from development, a response to what administration officials called a recent rash of destruction.
The officials said that in the last two years, some 20,000 acres of wetlands and an additional 150 miles of streams had been destroyed because of what they portrayed as a loophole opened by a court decision three years ago.
The new rules, to take effect after a 60-day period of public comment, would close that loophole by adding greater detail to regulations that specify what kinds of wetlands development require an environmental impact review by the government.
The rules, issued by the Environmental Protection Agency and the Army Corps of Engineers, are part of the administration's effort to fight the court decision, issued in January 1997 by a federal district judge in Washington and upheld in June 1998 by the District of Columbia U.S.
Circuit Court of Appeals.
Interpreting unspecific language in the Clean Water Act, both courts held that developers did not need to obtain a federal permit to excavate, drain or ditch a wetland as long as they did not dump soil on the property in question.
The EPA had sought as early 1993 to subject all development on wetlands to strict environmental review, but that approach was rejected by the courts, which ruled in favor of arguments made by developers and by the National Mining Association.
Among the winners in that case was the National Association of Homebuilders, which Thursday expressed strong disagreement with the new rules.
``This is a bad decision,'' said a spokeswoman, Susan Asmus, ``and it is not consistent with the previous court rulings or with the Clean Water Act''.
In her own announcement, Carol Browner, administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, said: ``Today's proposal will allow us to go as far as we can through administrative reforms to close this loophole and protect wetlands.
The action we take today strengthens the protection of vital resources for future generations''.
Similarly the Sierra Club hailed the decision as an important strengthening of environmental safeguards.
``Limiting this loophole should protect the streams and wetlands that are home to thousands of birds, fish and other wildlife,'' said Robin Mann of the club's National Wetlands Committee.
``Streams and marshes protect our communities by acting as a natural sponge, soaking up water that would otherwise flood our neighborhoods''.
Administration officials warned that the action would not in itself be sufficient to guard against destruction of wetlands, and called on Congress to strengthen the Clean Water Act further.
The term ``wetlands'' is generally used to describe marshes, swamps, bogs and similar areas typically situated between dry land and bodies of water.
These areas play important roles in filtering and cleansing water, in serving as a reservoir for flood water, and in harboring fish and shellfish populations.
The EPA's announcement Thursday vividly described the areas' significance.
``Destruction of wetlands,'' the statement said, ``can increase flooding and runoff potential, harm neighboring property, cause stream and river pollution and result in the loss of valuable habitat''.
Since the late 1700s, the agency said, over half the nation's wetlands have been lost to development and other activities.
Seven states, it said, have lost more than 80 percent of their original wetlands.
China will no longer consider the interests of tree-cutters when building hydroelectric power station on the upper reaches of the Yangtze and will not leave log channels for them.
The State Environmental Protection Administration says that all water conservation projects, and agriculture and forestry development along China's major rivers must be assessed in accordance with environmental protection standards, and that no projects will be allowed if they pose a threat to the environment.
Ecological damage has been a source of this year's floods.
Water levels on some sections of the Yangtze and at Dongting Lake have reached record highs, even though the flow was below record levels.
The State Environmental Protection Administration said in a report that serious damage to lakes, pools, and wetlands, a decline in vegetation's ecological function, and the resulting soil erosion have all contributed to the floods.
The administration is doing a more detailed study of ecological problems along China's major rivers and is trying to suggest ways of easing the problem.
SAN FRANCISCO _ ``Star Wars'' fan Khari Crowder set up camp Saturday on the sidewalk near the Coronet Theater.
Next to him was a big banner that declared: ``I'M FIRST''.
``If I could be here a month, I would,'' said Crowder, who works for a San Francisco radio station under the name Krazy K.
He was among the handful of fans who began lining up at the movie house, hoping to snag tickets to the long-awaited ``Star Wars: Episode I _ The Phantom Menace''.
The line _ a scene repeated in many other cities _ is expected to balloon as the film's May 19 opening approaches.
Advance ticket sales begin a week earlier.
It's a long wait and a lot of work for a movie that isn't even officially set to play at the Coronet.
But it looks like The Force is with the fans: United Artists Theaters executive vice president Mike Pade believes the deal is ``99.9 percent done'' with film distributor Twentieth Century Fox to book ``Episode I'' at the Coronet.
Crowder said he first showed up Friday night but the police told him to move.
So he slept in his van, which was parked nearby.
He was back in the same spot Saturday, lounging on a lawn chair.
He said he was prepared to wait until opening day.
``They don't call him `Krazy' for nothing,'' said a co-worker who dropped by to see him.
For other fans camped out, the wait is a minor inconvenience to see the first ``Star Wars'' installment since 1983.
``I've been waiting for this moment for 15 years,'' said A.J.
Nappa, a 20-year-old San Francisco resident who staked out a piece of pavement a few feet from the theater's box office.
For him, it's not just a movie.
``This is a defining moment for our generation''.
He and friend Joe Buckley began their camp-out Saturday at 9 a.m.
Their spirits were up as they munched on pizza and played Monopoly _ the ``Star Wars'' edition, no less.
The wind threatened to blow away their Monopoly money.
But even then they seemed prepared to weather the nearly three-week wait.
Stashed away in their cars were tents, sleeping bags and other necessities.
More friends will join them as the days pass, they said.
Round Table Pizza, a few doors from the Coronet, welcomes any extra business the ``Star Wars'' hype brings.
Assistant manager Peter Kwan said he's used to blockbuster films sparking big crowds, but he's not used to seeing a line form so early.
``I think ``Star Wars' is going to be the biggest,'' Kwan said.
Nappa, Buckley and his friends plan to watch the classic ``Star Wars'' trilogy on the eve of the film's opening _ right where they're camped, using a TV, VCR and gas generator.
The moviegoers at the Coronet aren't alone in their enthusiasm.
Over the weekend, there were signs of ``Phantom'' fever spreading: _ More than 15,000 fans overwhelmed the Wings Over the Rockies Air and Space Museum in Denver for the three-day ``Star Wars Celebration,'' a Lucasfilm- sanctioned event featuring cast, crew, props and merchandise _ enough to make the most rabid Jedi junkie drool.
_ FAO Schwarz, Toys R Us and other chains prepared to open Monday at 12:01 a.m. to hawk long-awaited ``Episode I'' goods, such as plastic light sabers, talking action figures and toy spaceships.
Merchandise sales from the classic trilogy have raked in more than $4 billion and the new film is expected to match that.
``The Phantom Menace,'' which opens in 2,500 theaters on opening day, is expected to surpass the $1.78 billion grossed worldwide by ``Star Wars: The Empire Strikes Back'' and ``Return of the Jedi''.
Some even think it may sink ``Titanic's'' record-setting $1.84 billion worldwide receipts.
The $115 million film is a ``prequel'' set about 30 years before the first ``Star Wars'' film.
One part of the storyline tells of a 9-year-old slave boy named Anakin Skywalker, who eventually becomes the infamous Darth Vader of the trilogy.
The plot also centers around a brewing galactic war involving the Trade Federation and the Republic of pre-Imperial days.
Buckley, 19, tried to explain the appeal of the ``Star Wars'' series that has kept it a cult favorite since the first film appeared in 1977.
``I've watched a lot of movies and that's just the one that grabs you,'' he said.
``The movie's magic is still there.''
The ``Star Wars'' series has a lot to answer for.
In the specious book ``Easy Riders and Raging Bulls,'' it's targeted as the catalyst for the end of personal filmmaking.
Its success, along with that of ``Jaws,'' is said to have finished off a certain kind of movie forever.
In fact, the movie that probably started off everything that ``Star Wars'' is accused of was actually ``Gone With the Wind''.
It got the kind of blockbuster send-off in the press that is still imitated today, 60 years later.
``GWTW'' producer David O.
Selznick made sure that every step of the film's conception was covered by the all-too-willing news media: from the purchase of the rights to Margaret Mitchell's novel to the highly publicized worldwide search for a Scarlett O'Hara.
If the cable outlet E!, which serves up fresh news releases still warm from the Xerox machines, had been around in 1939, it would've been eagerly fogging up Selznick's office window for a glimpse of the Great Man's shrewd manipulations.
Actually, unlike ``GWTW,'' for which Selznick bent over backward to squeeze every inky drop of publicity, ``Star Wars'' was a personal project that flew below media radar for a long time before its release _ as hard as that is to believe _ and that Lucas had to shop around to get made.
Universal Studios, where he'd made the hit ``American Graffiti,'' refused to make ``Star Wars''.
And one of the few pre-release pieces on the film in The New York Times was stuck inside in the Sunday Arts &AMP; Leisure section, and detailed a Lucas working so hard to get out a picture that he was happy with that he seemed to be blowing on the prints to get them dry and into theaters on time.
Lucas' appropriation of simple mythology made ``Star Wars'' the first post-Vietnam War-era movie.
That is, the first big movie of its time by a film-school student who was totally uninfected by '70s cynicism or fear of the draft.
(Lucas was set to direct what became ``Apocalypse Now,'' with Francis Coppola producing, so it's not that he was unfamiliar with those elements).
The characters _ more archetype than character, really _ lent themselves to the sheer unsophisticated enjoyment of kids, and Lucas' canny pilfering of philosophy, psychology and camp gave those interested in searching out deeper meaning a chance to do so.
Luke Skywalker's quest has been compared with the New and Old Testaments, Homer and Superman's feats.
It seems that it took nostalgia to get ``Star Wars'' back into hyperspace.
If the trilogy, in which Luke goes nose to nose with Darth Vader and discovers that Vader is his father and that Princess Leia is his sister, had been re-released 10 years ago, it might have got the obsessives out of the house.
But bringing the trilogy out a couple of years ago piqued the interest of those who were kids when they saw it the first time.
And the rerelease also served as the most successful trailer in history, whetting appetites for the May 19 opening of ``Phantom Menace''.
``Phantom'' is in the unique _ and intimidating _ position of being hyped everywhere for its May 19 opening.
The reason that ``Star Wars'' is being blamed for leading to the enshrinement of infantilization in popular culture is that it changed the stakes in a way no one dreamed of before.
Before ``Star Wars,'' pictures aching for blockbuster status were based on well-publicized books, or spent a lot of money on movie stars and spectacle, in a sweaty-palmed attempt to get audiences away from their TVs.
Most major studios had nearly bankrupted themselves trying to produce expensive event films roughly 10 years before ``Star Wars'' was made.
(The biggest failure, ``Cleopatra,'' was made by 20th Century Fox _ ironically, the studio that became the home of ``Star Wars'' because no one else wanted it).
Even ``Jaws'' was an example of filmmakers chasing a hit; the movie was based on a bestselling trash novel that was yellowing on everyone's beach blanket a couple of summers before the picture came out.
But ``Jaws'' hit because it crossed over to the young audience that had been avoiding Julie Andrews singing to Rock Hudson (''Darling Lili''), or Clint Eastwood singing to anybody (''Paint Your Wagon'') _ and the youth audience was the first to go see a movie again and again.
``Star Wars'' had no big-name actors, and science fiction didn't make sense to the World War II generation that was running the film industry.
They didn't yet realize that science fiction was due to replace the western as the action metaphor that mattered.
The evidence, based on the middling ratings of ``Star Trek'' _ which would also go on to become a cottage industry (a cottage the size of Belgium) _ was that people wouldn't rouse themselves to watch spaceships roar across the screen.
Unless Stanley Kubrick put them up there.
``Star Wars'' also proved that, for the first time, a studio wouldn't have to wait a generation for a film to topple the No.
1 grossing movie of all time from the box office.
It took 35 years, and the arrival of ``Jaws,'' for ``GWTW'' to be removed as box-office champ.
But it took less than three years for ``Star Wars'' to unseat ``Jaws,'' and by the end of 1977, ``Close Encounters of the Third Kind'' was on its way to outdoing ``Star Wars'' in box-office receipts.
It seems unfair to fault ``Star Wars'' for the laziness of the film industry, for the fact that studios suddenly wanted to find a way to make a science of what was essentially a gamble: finding a manifest-destiny hit.
They'd forgotten that Lucas' film cost tens of millions less than the big-budget blunders featuring stars who had long since outlived their usefulness.
(Although Eastwood did go on to much larger success, he never made any money singing in his movies.
If you need any further proof, just check the layers of dust on top of that copy of ``Honkytonk Man'' at your local video store).
Maybe the most important thing to note about ``Star Wars,'' along with its inclusion of comic-book storytelling elements, Joseph Campbell invocations of mythology and businesslike handling of science fiction (Lucas didn't glorify otherworldly action adventure) is that it was the first big film-generation hit.
That is, it was the first movie to blow up by quoting other films, such as the procession at the end of ``Star Wars'' echoing Nazi documentarian Leni Riefenstahl's ``Triumph of the Will'' _ complete with the columns of soldiers moving in exactly the same pattern.
(At the time, it served as a fairly subtle indication that the Force had fascistic implications).
Or the x-wing shootout sequence lifted from scores of WWII dogfight scenes.
In the pre-video days, the world of old movies was mostly at the fingertips of film-school students.
People who could study them over and over, and carefully decide what to steal _ or, more politely, pay homage to.
By hitting so big so fast, ``Star Wars'' raised interest in entertainment, so that now every publication except ``The Watchtower'' sees the virtue of giving movie-related stories big play.
But the result is that the generation following every step of ``The Phantom Menace'' before it opens Wednesday is robbed of a sense of discovery.
They'll never know the thrill of going to a late show on a Monday night and finding it's sold out.
What ``Star Wars'' helped to create, and has now become a part of, is the need to have every element of a film spelled out before it's seen.
Lucas and company tried to sidestep spilling secrets, but the Internet is filled with reviews by fans who sneaked into exhibitor screenings.
Almost everyone has forgotten the joy of having a hit sneak up on you, of seeing a movie no studio wanted to make blast its way to the top.
That's why the world got sick of Quentin Tarantino so fast.
(Elvis Mitchell is film critic for the Fort Worth Star-Telegram.
You can call him at (817) 390-7614.
Visit the Star-Telegram's online services on the World Wide Web: www.star-telegram.com) nn
Who doesn't remember feeling an electrifying zing up the spine at that majestic blast of trumpets and the ``Star Wars'' title appearing on the big screen for the first time?
With innovative special effects and a classic good-vs.-evil theme, the ``Star Wars'' series became a part of pop culture.
For ``Star Wars'' enthusiasts, the hottest film shown last week had its sneak preview announced on the Internet and sent a small army of fans into theaters around the country to watch it over and over again.
The Zing strikes back.
That was the response to the two-minute trailer _ just the preview, mind you _ for ``The Phantom Menace,'' George Lucas' latest installment in what is being billed as a prequel to the ``Star Wars'' trilogy.
The actual film is due in theaters on May 21, 1999.
The first ``Star Wars'' trailer also began showing months before the film's release in May 1977, but after reports of audiences booing and laughing, the film's distributor, 20th Century Fox, quailed and yanked it out of circulation.
It was a completely different scene Tuesday night at the sneak preview of the preview in a downtown Manhattan theater.
(Its official opening date was Friday, but the movie's Web site, www.starwars.com, announced advance screenings at selected theaters).
The lights went dark, and unlike the typical New York movie experience, the audience instantly shut up.
The crowd seemed to be holding its breath as scenes from ``The Phantom Menace'' thundered onto the screen in a flurry of spaceships, aliens, robots and humanoids, all new but vaguely familiar.
Set a generation before the original ``Star Wars'' movie, Episode I follows a youthful Obi-Wan Kenobi and Anakin Skywalker, the boy who is destined to become Darth Vader.
The cast includes Liam Neesom, Natalie Portman and Samuel L.
Jackson, among others.
To see the preview, fans still had to pay $9, the price of admission at most New York City theaters.
As soon as the trailer ended and the one for the remake of ``Psycho'' began, about 30 people ran to the theater next door to catch the ``Phantom Menace'' preview again as it began to play after the closing credits of ``Meet Joe Black''.
Ushers discreetly looked the other way as the trailer was being trailed.
``I've been here since 10 a.m.,'' said Chris Bergoch, a 26-year-old diehard ``Star Wars'' fan who took the day off from work and spent it ducking in and out of three screening rooms showing the trailer.
By 8 p.m., he'd seen it 20 times and was planning to spend the rest of the night there.
``I've waited 16 years for this,'' he said.
Another all-day viewer was Jude Lane, who was only 3 when ``Star Wars'' came out and says it was her first memory.
``No matter what the color, race, background or religion of the people watching the trailer, for two minutes and five seconds everyone feels the same,'' she said.
``You're friends with everybody in the theater''.
The renewed buzz about ``Star Wars'' has been building since last year's re-release of the trilogy, which incorporated new footage and state-of-the-art digital effects.
The movies offered nostalgia for viewers, and some of them brought their own children to experience the movies on the big screen, and not slice-and-dice versions on television.
Generation X, who once nagged Mom for those little $1.49 Luke Skywalker action figures, can today choose from vast array of toys including videos, games, books and a $29.95 CD-ROM titled ``Behind the Magic,'' which serves as a guide to the ``Star Wars'' universe and offers a glimpse of ``The Phantom Menace''.
But by May all the hype _ from merchandise to advertising _ might work to turn off an already cynical public.
``There are concerns, certainly in the wake of `Godzilla,''' said Andrew Hindes, a senior writer at Variety.
``Fox knows they don't have to overhype this.
You can't have more awareness.
If they're smart, they'll be subtle.
You could open it cold and it would still be huge''.
``Godzilla'' cost Sony Pictures Entertainment $200 million to make and market globally, but will result in little if any profit.
So far, the original ``Star Wars'' trilogy has made at least $1.7 billion.
``The Phantom Menace,'' the first in another Lucasfilm trilogy, cost $115 million to make.
No one knows if the hype will overshadow ``The Phantom Menace'' itself.
If Lucas has stuck with his original vision of the saga, which was of a simple, feel-good action series full of universal themes, it might not.
Deep down, past all the special effects and whiz-bang glitz, the director is conjuring with some fundamental elements of mankind.
`` `Star Wars' is not a simple morality play,'' the late Joseph Campbell, an authority on mythology, wrote.
``It has to do with the powers of life as they are either fulfilled or broken and suppressed through the action of man''.
Maybe with this newest episode, the marketing team will resist the temptation to paste hundreds of posters saying ``Yoda is THIS tall'' on the sides of street-corner newspaper boxes.
If there's a film that doesn't need too much hype, it would be ``The Phantom Menace,'' and face it, the Force is already with them. &QL;
LOS ANGELES (AP) --Arriving in a meteor shower of hype and dodging reviews from the Dark Side, the new ``Star Wars'' movie was set to open, appropriately, when the stars are out, at midnight screenings around the country early Wednesday.
``This is the best place to be right now in the whole world,'' said Chris Chaplin, 30, who had a ticket to the midnight show at Mann's Chinese Theater but was waiting in line hours before the doors swung open to get a good seat.
It's a foregone conclusion that ``Star Wars: Episode I --The Phantom Menace'' will be one of the biggest films of all time.
The only question is whether it will get enough repeat business to approach the $600 million ``Titanic'' collected in North America.
``It's going to kill in that opening week and do just huge, unprecedented business,'' said Paul Dergarabedian, president of box office tracker Exhibitor Relations Co.
``But beyond that you're in a very competitive release period''.
Best estimates are ``The Phantom Menace'' will reap more than $100 million in its five-day opening frame of Wednesday through Sunday, putting it on a pace to beat ``Lost World: Jurassic Park'' for the film-opener crown.
``Lost World'' made a record $90.2 million in a four-day Memorial Day weekend in 1997.
``The Phantom Menace'' also will be competing against its ancestors.
The original ``Star Wars'' is the No.
2 movie of all time.
Counting its various re-issues, it has sold $461 million in tickets domestically.
``Return of the Jedi'' has grossed $309 million, for No.
7 on the all-time list, and ``The Empire Strikes Back'' has made $290 million, for ninth place.
Because of the intense adoration for the first three ``Star Wars'' movies, the new installment is considered critic-proof.
Which is a good thing for ``Star Wars'' creator George Lucas.
The reviews mostly have been somewhere between negative and vicious.
The harshest had to be The New Yorker's Anthony Lane, who likened ``The Phantom Menace'' to excrement.
More typical was Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times, who called it a ``considerable letdown,'' a ``ponderous and plodding'' movie that is ``noticeably lacking in warmth and humor''.
Those who liked the movie focused on the visual spectacle.
Roger Ebert wrote in the Chicago Sun-Times that the movie was ``an astonishing achievement in imaginative filmmaking''.
Produced, directed and written by Lucas, who also bankrolled the entire $115 million-plus budget, ``The Phantom Menace'' begins the back story of ``Star Wars''.
It is set a generation earlier, when Darth Vader was still a cute blond kid named Anakin Skywalker, who would grow up to become Luke's absentee father.
The merchandising campaign for ``The Phantom Menace'' is so far-reaching that it includes not just the usual action figures and video games but special Pepsi cans that you can collect for reasons beyond recycling.
Even a Colonel Sanders lookalike was brought back from the dead for a ``Star Wars'' chicken tie-in commercial.
The first of the hard-core ``Star Wars'' fans started lining up weeks ago, and when advanced tickets became available last week, there was a buying frenzy, with the midnight shows selling out almost immediately.
At Mann's Chinese, where the original ``Star Wars'' premiered 22 years ago, more than 100 people were lined up at midmorning Tuesday.
One was Analisa Siemsen, 21, an aspiring screenwriter.
``I never camped out for anything before,'' she said, ``but there's no Woodstock, so you have to come to the `Star Wars' line.''
DENVER _ There were a lot of storm troopers wandering around without their blaster guns at the ``Star Wars'' Celebration here, the first convention and exposition dedicated to the 22-year-old movie series to win the approval and support of the films' creator, George Lucas.
Through a strange twist of fate, the ``Star Wars'' Celebration landed in Denver on the same weekend as the National Rifle Association convention, which drew 7,000 protesters, and just 10 days after the Columbine High School shootings in Littleton, a suburb 20 minutes away.
It was food for thought, not least because the ``Star Wars'' movies _ whose ``dark side'' leans heavily on the iconography of the Third Reich, an obsession of the Columbine killers _ are filled with the kind of shoot-'em-up entertainment fantasy that many citizens are blaming for society's ills.
Throughout the convention, which drew about 40,000 fans to the Wings Over the Rockies Air and Space Museum here Friday to Sunday, the specter of Columbine hung over the event like the Death Star.
A petition was circulated urging Decipher, the company that makes the ``Star Wars'' Customizable Card Game, to create a card depicting one of the slain students, a 14-year-old ``Star Wars'' fan named Steven Curnow, as a Jedi knight.
A Decipher spokesman said the company declined ``because other kids would start thinking it's fun to kill him with a blaster'' during game play.
Eric Harris, one of the two students who planned and died in the Littleton attack, included a rant on his Web site about things he hated, including ``Star Wars'' fans.
At the booth run by Star Wars Insider, the official fan club magazine, which organized the convention, action figures with guns were no longer for sale.
Dan Hogatt, a 30-year-old foreman at Ford Motor Co.
in Louisville, Ky.
, who dressed up as a very convincing Chewbacca complete with a fur head and suit, foam latex hands and drywall stilts that boosted his height to 8 feet, had to check his crossbow at the door.
(Light sabers were deemed permissible).
``They asked us not to bring our weapons in here,'' he said.
``And I was upset, but I totally understand''.
In the search for answers to the Littleton tragedy, convention goers turned to their favorite film.
One speaker told the audience to always remember the Columbine events and a quote from Yoda that appears in a trailer for the forthcoming ``Star Wars: Episode I _ The Phantom Menance''.
(The first movie in the new trilogy is set a generation before the first three ``Star Wars'' films).
``Fear is the path of the Dark Side,'' the green Zen master says.
``Fear leads to anger; anger leads to hate; hate leads to suffering''.
But in the end the anticipation that the first ``Star Wars'' prequel would be in theaters in less than three weeks _ on May 19, a date more anxiously awaited than the millennial New Year's Eve for most of these fans _ snapped fans out of tragic reality and into happy fantasy.
Some had overcome hardship to attend the celebration.
A dying father from the East Coast took his wife and young children, hoping that he could give them one last fond memory of being together as a family.
And Joshua Hamilton, a 26-year-old from Denver who works for a publisher of comic books, wandered through the exhibition center with his forehead lacerated with fresh cuts, a result of a car crash just hours earlier.
``Our car was totaled,'' said his wife, Kimberly.
``The ambulance came and put him in a neck brace and strapped him to a board.
They X-rayed both of us at the hospital and said we were OK.
It was worth it.
This is a once in a lifetime event''.
As films and personalities race through pop culture leaving a trail of momentary obsession behind them, ``Star Wars'' has passed the test of time and has spanned generations.
It has worked its epic tale of the relationships between good and evil, father and son, man and machine, youth and maturity, and thinking and feeling into a cultural landmark.
Joseph Campbell (whose book ``The Hero With a Thousand Faces'' seems to have inspired the galaxy-saving journey of Luke Skywalker) has been perhaps the films' greatest ally, examining it as a myth as universal as the Upanishads or the Bible.
``It's almost like a religion,'' said Won Park, a watercolor artist who flew in from Honolulu and dressed up as the Jedi master Qui-Gon Jinn (Liam Neeson's character in ``Episode I'').
``If George Lucas turned this into a religion, it would blow L.
Ron Hubbard's Dianetics out of the window''.
Hubbard, of course, was a science-fiction writer before he led the Church of Scientology.
Nearby, Michael Cruz, a 24-year-old fan from New York City with seven ``Star Wars'' tattoos and a wife in her eighth month of pregnancy, said they were waiting to watch ``Episode I'' to select a name for their baby.
Some of the people feverishly wandering through the tents and airplane hangers housing ``Star Wars'' toy and video game previews, glass-encased movie props and collectible merchandise seemed to fit the stereotype of geeky males in their 20s and early 30s.
But the convention drew a racially, sexually, ethnically and generationally mixed crowd, many in costume although inexplicably there was nary a Luke Skywalker or C-3PO in sight.
It was hard to tell whether a parent or a child was the ``Star Wars'' fan, and often the answer was both.
nn (BEGIN OPTIONAL TRIM) Most of these conventioneers inhabit an alternate world in which George Lucas is God.
The universe of ``Star Wars'' is one of his making, the quality of its images and products rigorously maintained and controlled by his company over the years.
The tale itself _ a fantasy rendered with elaborate realism down to the last planet, droid and Gungan, each of which has its own background story _ was created with the kind of methodical obsession with detail that is the hallmark of an Outsider artist like Henry Darger.
In his Chicago apartment several decades ago, the reclusive Darger typed 15,000 single-spaced pages and drew 300 oversize water-colors carefully detailing of the plight of young slave girls in outer space and the battle between their captors, the Glandelinians, and their protectors, the Abbennians, along with all kinds of supplemental characters and species.
The battle myth could have attracted a ``Star Wars''-like cult complete with corresponding action figures.
But without the benefit of mass entertainment it attracted only one fan in the artist's lifetime: Darger himself.
(END OPTIONAL TRIM) Lucas has the gift of being as focused on the commercial reach of his work as he is on its inner world.
Of the more than 30,000 ``Star Wars'' products _ a $4 billion business with rarities that fetch as much as $25,000 in the case of one Boba Fett action figure that shoots projectiles that may land in the throats of young children _ every one has been approved by Lucasfilm.
At the convention, merchants like Hallmark and Hasbro lucky enough to receive a Lucasfilm license showcased their official products _ from blow-up pool rafts shaped like Naboo Starfighters to toothbrushes emblazoned with the likeness of the new character Jar Jar Binks _ as if they were fragments of the lost ark.
(BEGIN OPTIONAL TRIM) ``Don't videotape,'' a representative in a ``Star Wars'' costume shop told one fan.
``Next thing you know, it will be on the Internet''.
When asked why anyone would care to post images of costumes of familiar characters on the Internet, the representative replied, ``I don't know, they told me to say that,'' ``they'' referring to Lucasfilm officials.
``It's all been hush-hush''.
Merchants were under strict orders not to sell or even discuss merchandise from the forthcoming movie, some of which conveniently went on sale in stores on Monday, the day after the convention ended.
The convention may have been a way to repay diehard fans, as editors at Star Wars Insider said, but it was also a way to stick them with the bill by waving new collectibles under their noses.
(END OPTIONAL TRIM) ``I placed my orders without knowing what the product was going to look like,'' said Kyle Puttkammer, owner of a store called Galactic Quest in Atlanta.
``But now that I've seen them, I'm going to increase my order''.
As he spoke, passers-by paused to take photos of Puttkammer, who was dressed as a young Obi-Wan Kenobi, and his 10-month-old daughter, dressed as Yoda, in her stroller.
In addition to being treated to never-before-screened scenes from the closely guarded film, audience members could attend question-and-answer sessions with many who worked on the film, including Jake Lloyd (who plays Anakin Skywalker, Luke's father and the future Darth Vader), Ray Park (the villain Darth Maul), Rick McCallum (the movie's producer), Anthony Daniels (the voice of C-3P0) and Pernilla August (Anakin's mother, Shmi Skywalker).
Ms. August was actually asked what it felt like to be the grandmother of Luke Skywalker.
``Star Wars'' buffs may be able to distinguish between fantasy and reality, but it was clear which side they preferred.
When an audience member asked Park whether his character, the devilish-looking, double-light-saber-wielding Darth Maul, would be returning in Episode II, the audience broke into confused murmurs.
``What do you want to hear''? asked the master of ceremonies, Daniels.
``The truth or a lie''?
Roaring through the tent came the overwhelming reply of over a thousand fans screaming in unison, ``A lie!''
SAN FRANCISCO _ The Force will soon be arriving at a toy store and Taco Bell near you.
In May, the merchandising and food promotion blitz for the long-awaited new ``Star Wars'' movie, ``Episode I _ The Phantom Menace,'' is scheduled to open.
A battalion of toy action figures and space crafts related to the movie will go on sale three weeks before ``Phantom'' opens nationwide.
Lucasfilm Ltd.
, which is producing the movie, has licensed Hasbro Inc.
, Galoob Toys Inc.
and Lego Group to make the toys.
Promotions with Pepsi, Taco Bell, Pizza Hut and Kentucky Fried Chicken are expected to blast off in May as well.
But that's about all Lucasfilm is divulging.
The company, which has a history of shrouding in secrecy the plots and special effects of the ``Star Wars'' movies, has kept a tight lid on its merchandising and promotion campaigns for ``Phantom''.
Despite few details about product and food tie-ins to the movie, industry observers say ``Phantom,'' which kicks off the second ``Star Wars'' trilogy, could prove to be the mother of all film merchandising attempts.
``I think there's a very good chance this will be the single biggest movie ever,'' said Marty Brochstein, executive editor of The Licensing Letter, a New York trade publication.
Brochstein estimated that sales from products related to ``Phantom'' could exceed those of the industry's largest single-movie merchandising grosser, ``The Lion King''.
Brochstein estimated that the Disney film has sold about $1.5 billion worth of toys, mugs, T-shirts and videos since its 1994 release.
``Everybody would be mightily disappointed if (``Phantom'') didn't move over $1 billion in merchandise,'' he said.
Judging from the estimated $4.5 billion in product sales generated since 1977 from the first three ``Star Wars'' flicks, most industry watchers are confident the new take won't disappoint.
According to New York-based License magazine, ``Star Wars'' films have had the highest-grossing product sales of any movie series.
They are followed by merchandise sales from ``The Lion King''; the ``Batman,'' ``Jurassic Park''and ``Star Trek'' films.
The cult of the original ``Star Wars'' films is likely to guarantee a huge audience for ``Phantom'' products.
``With `Star Wars', you're talking about a pre-sold market,'' said Diane Cardinale, spokeswoman for the Toy Manufacturers of America, an industry trade association in New York.
``Star Wars'' creator George Lucas is credited with founding the film merchandising industry.
As a result, Lucasfilm knows this segment of the industry like no other film studio.
```Star Wars' represented the birth of modern movie licensing,'' Brochstein said.
Lucas retained the licensing rights to products that used the ``Star Wars'' name.
``Before that, licensing was considered ancillary income.
But now in major films, particularly those that are kid-oriented, it becomes a budget item''.
Lucas's company has kept most of the details of the ``Phantom'' merchandising and promotional campaigns a mystery to build public interest for the movie.
``The Lucas people have been very, very strict about what they're doing,'' Brochstein said.
``They've let things out in dribs and drabs.
They make it a game''.
Last fall, Lucasfilm Ltd.
allowed retailers to begin selling three of the new ``Phantom'' toys: a four-inch plastic figure of Jedi knight Mace Windu that resembles Samuel L.
Jackson, the actor who plays the character; a space vehicle called STAP with Battle Droid; and the Gian Speeder and Theed Palace play set.
Retailers will sell more ``Phantom'' toys starting May 3, but Lucasfilm has not allowed Hasbro and Galoob to discuss the full range of merchandise they'll be releasing.
Lego has been allowed to say it will be coming out with two product lines _ Lego Star Wars Classic and Lego Star Wars Episode I _ that allow kids to build spacecraft from the first three ``Star Wars'' movies and the new film using traditional Lego pieces.
In addition to the toys, Sony Classical will release a ``Phantom'' soundtrack in May.
Video games from Nintendo and Lucas Arts are expected to roll onto store shelves in May as well, and Sega is making a new arcade game based on ``Phantom''.
On the promotions side, Pepsi, Taco Bell, Kentucky Fried Chicken and Pizza Hut also have been sworn to secrecy about their tie-ins with the movie.
Pepsi is reportedly producing several billion soda cans plastered with pictures of Star Wars characters.
The cans featuring Yoda will have prizes.
Pepsi would not comment on its promotions.
Tricon Global Restaurants Inc.
, the Louisville, Ky.
, parent of Taco Bell, Pizza Hut and Kentucky Fried Chicken, also wouldn't talk about its promotions.
TOKYO (AP) --Star Wars mania has struck in Japan, where fans turned out in droves at theaters around the country Saturday for a sneak preview of the hit movie.
Some in costume and others toting light sabers, the movie-goers began lining up as early as Thursday to see ``Star Wars: Episode I --The Phantom Menace'', which officially opens on July 10, more than five weeks after its U.S. debut.
``It's like a festival,'' said Yuki Nishijima, a 19-year old student who had been waiting seven hours for one of three late-night showings at the Nihon Gekijo theater in Tokyo.
Around him, hundreds of people sat in the theater's sweltering entryway, fanning themselves and passing the time with everything from backgammon to beer.
Japan, the world's second largest movie market, is home to legions of Star Wars fans, and the film has been heavily hyped by the media in the weeks leading up to its first showing.
Some say the space fantasy series holds a special appeal for the Japanese, who see it as an updated version of classic samurai films.
The first ``Star Wars'' movie was based loosely on ``The Hidden Fortress,'' a 1958 film about a warrior's journey by Akira Kurosawa, Japan's most renowned director.
``I realize this has sort of become a media event,'' said Chitose Koike, a 37-year old pianist who was waiting to see the sneak-preview.
``But I wanted to see it before everyone else''.
Nihon Gekijo officials said advance ticket sales had already surpassed previous records for the theater.
The new ``Star Wars'' prequel is good enough, but only just.
It's got the hardware, but neither the characters, the imagination, nor the resonance one had hoped for.
What fans will want to know, now that the hype can be replaced with actuality, is whether ``The Phantom Menace'' is sufficiently of a piece with the first three films to make it worth seeing.
The answer is yes, but not by much.
George Lucas, perhaps inevitably drawn back into the ``Star Wars'' gravitational field, has talked a lot about technological razzle-dazzle not being nearly as important as the characters and story.
But the truth is that it's the visuals and the new screenful of computer-generated whiz-bangs and other toys that drive ``The Phantom Menace''.
Character and personality take a back seat on this ride.
The kids toward whom the new film is frankly skewed will storm the malls and multiplexes to see Ewan McGregor's Obi-Wan Kenobi as a young hothead Jedi warrior, how Obi-Wan's wise mentor, Liam Neeson's Qui-Gon Jinn, teaches him control, and how they both discovered Jake Lloyd's prodigy, Anakin Skywalker, before he even knew there was such a thing as The Force, much less a Dark Side of it.
R2-D2 and C-3PO (before he got the skin job that made him gold and shiny) are on hand, too.
We're also introduced to Natalie Portman's young queen Amidala, who becomes the mother of Luke and Leia; to Samuel L.
Jackson's Mace Windu, whose role as a Jedi Council mainstay is so small you know he'll be back in later episodes; and to Ahmed Best's comic relief, Jar Jar Binks, a rubber-limbed amphibian Gumby figure who talks funny and walks clumsy and brightens the rather long and lightweight film a lot.
In short, there's a lot that's eye-filling in ``The Phantom Menace,'' but not much that's brain-filling, and nobody is going to think of it as soul food.
Its high point isn't even the space or land battles one has come to expect of ``Star Wars''.
It's a chariot race right out of ``Ben-Hur,'' except that it takes place on the desert planet of Tatooine, its chariots are jet-powered jalopy pods, and young Anakin looks like a World War I flying ace as he challenges the nasty champ in a contest whose ultimate winner will be Nintendo; pod race games will fly off the shelves as fast as laser swords.
Great pains were taken to make the gear in ``Phantom Menace'' look less sleek and evolved than in ``Star Wars,'' a reasonable enough decision since it takes place three decades earlier.
Jabba the Hutt, who figures briefly, even looks less blobby than the heavyweight we meet later.
Looking at Lloyd's smart, tough, empathetic Anakin has the effect of making us dread what we know will later be his downfall.
But the fact is that there isn't much emotional tug this time around.
``The Phantom Menace'' is bland, perhaps not surprisingly considering the difficulty of conjuring up the freshness and wonder with which the original burst upon the scene.
Although technically slicker, this installment isn't nearly as involving as ``Star Wars'' or ``The Empire Strikes Back''.
(By the time ``Return of the Jedi'' came out, there was a noticeable drop-off in energy and inspiration _ a trend that continues here).
There's no equivalent here of Alec Guinness's twinkling wisdom, Harrison Ford's unruliness, or the looming ominousness of the grown Darth Vader.
Lucas has written better stuff here for his Industrial Light &AMP; Magic computers than he has for the people.
``The Phantom Menace'' mutes McEwan's Obi-Wan and Neeson's Qui-Gon to the point where we grow detached enough to speculate on possible influences on aspects the new film.
When Qui-Jon and Obi-Wan visit Anakin's mother, learn about the remarkable circumstances surrounding the boy's birth, and ask her permission to take her son from slavery on Tatooine to a life as an apprentice Jedi knight, the moment seems to echo, intentionally or not, ``Citizen Kane''.
Visually, the idyllic capital of Naboo, the peaceful planet ruled by Amidala and coveted by the trouble-making Dark Lord of the Sith, suggests a cross between Marin County and the patina-domed campuses of Stanford and the University of California at Berkeley.
The elaborate sci-fi towers of the Federation's capital city of Coruscant suggest ``Metropolis'' passed through a computer.
Darth Maul, the bad guy in the climactic laser sword fight, suggests a hooded wannabe from the rock group KISS.
Lucas even has fun with ``Monday Night Football'' in the character of a two-headed announcer at the pod races.
The big victory celebration seems like a halftime show.
Just as Steven Spielberg's ``Jurassic Park'' dissolved the line between movies and theme parks, so ``The Phantom Menace'' dissolves the line between movies and merchandising.
It's its own giant exercise in product placement.
It's hard to believe that McGregor's Obi-Wan and Portman's Amidala won't be given juicier material in episodes two and three.
Even allowing for the inevitably overinflated expectations connected to this overinflated event, ``The Phantom Menace'' is more fizzle than sizzle.
Although it at least avoids disaster, it brings to mind an exchange at Lucas's recent press conference in New York.
When I asked the director what was at stake for him with this movie, personally and professionally, he replied, ``Nothing''.
Perhaps that's the trouble with it.
LONDON (AP) --A failed bet on a "Star Wars" craze in Britain has left a publisher with 10 million unsold books and a vacancy for the post of chief executive.
British children's books publisher Dorling Kindersley announced Monday that its chief executive has resigned because of "a seriously misjudged" overinvestment in books tied to the launch of the latest movie in the saga, "Star Wars: Episode I, The Phantom Menace".
Expecting a Christmas rush, James Middlehurst arranged for the group to print 13 million of the books in the 18 months to Dec.
31 last year.
Sales totaled 3 million.
Company chairman Peter Kindersley blamed the "Star Wars" debacle for more than half of a pretax loss of $41 million which it expects to announce in the spring.
ATLANTA _ The phenomenon began a long time ago in a cineplex not so far away.
Now it's coming back _ in 83 days, to be precise.
And leading up to its May 21 release, George Lucas' fourth ``Star Wars'' film will be one hyped-up ``Menace'' to society.
Next month will bring a new 2.5-minute trailer for ``Star Wars: Episode I _ The Phantom Menace'' purported to have more than 100 fresh sequences from the film, featuring battle droids, laser firepower and an eye-popping canyon race.
Later, Pepsi USA will launch an ad campaign for soft drink collectibles that will likely include a gold Pepsi can sporting Jedi instructor Yoda and the ``Star Wars: Episode I'' logo.
And starting April 30, Denver will host the Lucasfilm Ltd.-sanctioned ``Star Wars Celebration,'' a three-day fan festival at the Wings Over the Rockies Museum with ``Phantom Menace'' sneak peeks, appearances by many of the film's stars, including young Jake Lloyd who plays Anakin Skywalker (a.k.a.
Darth Vader), and a marketplace hawking merchandise from all the ``Star Wars'' films.
When the movie finally debuts in May, some think its box office take will be staggering, likely topping ``The Lost World: Jurassic Park's'' record $92.73 million opener in 1997.
For ``Phantom Menace,'' Hollywood is planning on stepping out of the way.
``You've got a clear path completely around that movie for weeks,'' says Ira Mayer, publisher of Entertainment Marketing Letter in New York.
``Nobody's putting anything major out against it''.
Moviegoers haven't seen hype this big since, well, last summer and ``Godzilla''.
``Hype can kill you, as `Godzilla' found out,'' says Dan Cox, film editor at the trade magazine Variety.
``I expect (`Phantom Menace') will make an enormous amount of money, but I don't know how it will hold up.
George Lucas is a little out of touch, frankly.
But he can tell a story well.
I just wonder if the technology is going to be up to what people are expecting''.
Certainly, people are expecting a lot.
Last November ``you had moviegoers paying $7.50 not to see a movie but to see the first trailer (when it was paired with films like `The Waterboy' and `Meet Joe Black'),'' says CNN's Jim Moret, anchor of ``Showbiz Today''.
``If that isn't pre-opening buzz, I don't know what is''.
One of those fans was Kristopher Graham, 24, of Dawsonville, who drove to Alpharetta's North Point theaters just to see the trailer.
He dubbed it ``awesome.
It sends chills down you''.
The whole ``Star Wars'' thing ``has come to occupy our culture in a unique way,'' says Matthew Bernstein, associate professor of the film studies program at Emory University.
``They talk about a film everybody has seen like `The Wizard of Oz'.
It's occurred to me I'm no longer sure every child in America growing up sees 'The Wizard of Oz'.
But you know every one of them sees 'Star Wars'''.
And it's not just in America.
Recently, Moritz Minzlaff, an 18-year-old German college student in Karlsruhe, south of Heidelberg, posted an Internet message begging fellow foreign ``Star Wars'' fans to join him in traveling to the United States to see ``Phantom Menace'' in May (opening dates outside North America start in June).
So far Minzlaff has gotten responses from dozens of fans in Germany, France, Slovakia, Great Britain, Sweden, Austria and Switzerland.
He plans to travel to Los Angeles with the group he assembles for the first showing of ``Phantom Menace''.
``I haven't done anything like this (before),'' Minzlaff says in an interview via e-mail.
``I think it's a crazy thing to do but that's part of the fun.
`Star Wars' is something special to me.
I've never been this excited about anything.
I started counting down the days when the release was more than 500 days away''.
Similar sentiments clog the Internet, which has been littered with ``Star Wars'' sites for years.
Activity has intensified in recent weeks with unofficial postings of purported sound clips pirated from the film's production, an alleged frame-by-frame accounting of what moviegoers will see in the coming new trailer and spy reports from London's Abbey Road where John Williams recently began recording the ``Phantom Menace'' soundtrack.
Much of the information is housed in sites commonly referred to among the webnoscenti as ``spoilers'' for the obvious reason that they readily reveal anything they can get their hands on.
The minutiae is often mind-boggling.
Ryan Johnson's www.astheygo.com, for instance, details one script excerpt he's ``99 percent sure that this might be authentic''!
Here it is: Jedi: ``Holy Moley!
What's that''?
Anakin: ``I've got a bad feeling about this ''...
Jedi: ``You always say that''.
Some Internet users such as Germany's Minzlaff avoid many of the spoiler sites.
``I'm very much concerned about knowing too much about the story,'' he says.
But he does hook into sites like www.countingdown.com at least three times a day for ``Phantom Menace'' updates.
Countingdown.com is an obsessive-compulsive nirvanaland.
The entrance to the ``Star Wars'' pages contains a digital clock counting down the days, hours, minutes and seconds until ``Phantom Menace'' opens in theaters.
(You, of course, can capture the clock to place on your own computer desktop).
Inside are news bits gleaned from media around the globe, posters from the film and spy reports, including the latest gossip on the burgeoning line of upcoming toys.
One item, for instance, estimates exactly how many new Lego ``Star Wars'' Mindstorm Droid Developer Kits (each selling for $100) will be available at every Toys R Us this fall.
The Internet's ``Phantom Menace'' mania, however, isn't as shocking to some as the mainstream media's handling of both of the film and marketing in general.
``Everybody's talking about the hype,'' Entertainment Marketing Letter's Mayer says.
``The sense in the press is that (the film) is the second coming.
The truth is there is no next Beatles, there's no next Elvis.
There is just what there is''.
In effect, he says, ``the media is pushing how marketing is done''.
The press has definitely picked up on the ``Phantom Menace'' buzz.
Many newspapers, including The Atlanta Journal-Constitution, covered the debut of the first trailer.
USA Today has announced it will publish a package of ``Phantom Menace'' stories today.
The San Jose Mercury News began a weekly column on the coming film last Sunday.
And magazines like Vanity Fair have run extensive interviews.
Movieline even featured twentysomething movie and TV stars talking about their favorite ``Star Wars'' characters.
(``Felicity's'' Keri Russell, for example, admits she wore her hair in big, tight Princess Leia ear buns for two years after seeing the original film, which debuted in 1977).
To CNN's Moret, it's all pretty much justified.
``I don't look at our function as being a marketer of the film,'' he says.
``But if it's being embraced enough by moviegoers to obsess over seeing a trailer, if people are going to camp out to get the first tickets, that's a story''.
With this film, there's a ``clear indication for quality and blockbuster,'' Moret says.
``You don't often have both''.
Plus, he adds, all the hype and all the marketing and all the press and all the Web sites will only be too much ``when the fans say it is too much''.
Is it too much?
Certainly not for Keir Larock, 17, a student at the Maine School of Science and Mathematics in Limestone, Ma.
In a phone interview, he says he's seen the first three ``Star Wars'' films ``200 times each easily,'' has downloaded from the Internet at least seven copies of the first ``Phantom Menace'' trailer and is organizing via the Web his own group of fans to see the film on opening day.
``I was totally mystified'' while watching that trailer for the first time, he says.
``I saw my reason to live for the next six months''.
Story Filed By Cox Newspapers For Use By Clients of the New York Times News Service
_ The TV show ``60 Minutes'' recently devoted not one, but two segments to director George Lucas.
_ Vogue featured ``Star Wars Style''.
_ Vanity Fair has devoted cover stories to ``The Phanton Menace'' and its stars.
_ For months, ''Star Wars'' fans have been analyzing every second of ``The Phantom Menace'' movie trailer.
Clearly, the world awaits the premiere of George Lucas' ``Star Wars: Episode I _ The Phantom Menae''.
----------------------------------------------------------- Are you prepared to give your readers the ``Star Wars'' coverage they crave? ------------------------------------------------------------ If not, The New York Times Syndicate can help _ with Ian Spelling's STAR WARS COUNTDOWN package, which will guide your readers to the May 19 premiere.
(FOR PURCHASE INFORMATION, SEE BELOW).
WHAT WILL YOU GET?
INTERVIEWS WITH: Samuel L.
Jackson, who play Mace Windu; Ewan McGregor, who plays Obi-Wan Kenobi; and Liam Neeson, who plays Kenobi's mentor, Qui-Gon.
FEATURES ON: the crazy antics of fans _ from dressing up as ``Star Wars'' characters to creating wild Web sites; ``Star Wars'' trivia (the ultimate quiz)!
ART IS AVAILABLE WITH EVERY STORY.
The latest feature, which was recently sent to subscribers: ``STAR WARS FEVER'' (EDS: This feature can be easily localized).
How are die-hard ``Star Wars'' fans occupying themselves as they wait for the premiere of ``The Phantom Menace''?
Fernando DeRosa, a 22-year-old college student from Suffern, N.Y., dresses up as the character Boba Fett and attends sci-fi conventions.
The costume, fashioned from assorted pieces of fabric, plastic and metal, as well as parts purchased online, took two years to assemble and cost nearly $2,000.
``I met Jeremy Bulloch, who played Boba Fett, and he told me it was the most realistic Fett costume he'd ever seen,'' DeRosa says.
Derek Bruner, an electrician from Houston, Texas, toils away on ``Star Wars _ The Living Story,'' an Internet-based saga set six years before ``Star Wars''.
Brunner's Web page has had 15,000 hits since its debut in August 1997!
FOR MORE INFORMATION ABOUT THE PACKAGE...
call toll-free 888-269-8796 to connect to a New York Times Syndicate sales executive near you.
Thank you.
_ The New York Times Syndicate .
HOLLYWOOD _ The opening title reads: ``Every generation has a legend.
... Every journey has a first step.
... Every saga has a beginning''.
Then the John Williams music starts, the opening chords so unmistakable that movie audiences burst into applause.
``Star Wars'' is back.
Or more precisely, a 2-minute 10-second trailer for ``Star Wars: Episode I _ The Phantom Menace,'' the first ``Star Wars'' film since the release of ``Return of the Jedi'' 15 years ago.
The new film, written and directed by George Lucas, opens on May 21, but the anticipation for it is extraordinary, several distribution executives say.
The trailer was screened on Tuesday in 26 states on 75 screens selected by the movie's distributor, 20th Century Fox.
Fans heard about it four days earlier on the Lucasfilm Web site (www.starwars.com), and it quickly turned into a film event that had no precedent.
Theaters showing films like ``The Waterboy,'' ``The Siege'' and ``Meet Joe Black'' were crammed with people _ mostly young men _ who paid full admission just to see the trailer and left when the movie began.
The trailer was also shown after each movie ended, so a handful of theater owners allowed filmgoers to return with their torn ticket stub.
(Historically, trailers used to be shown after movies ended, hence the name).
``This is incredible,'' said Paul Dergarabedian, president of Exhibitor Relations Co.
, which monitors the box office for theater owners.
``We've never heard of a trailer packing people into a theater.
It's a precedent-setting event''.
He said the reaction to the gimmick made it inevitable that the new ``Star Wars'' would have powerful audience appeal.
``It's going to reach fever pitch with this movie, which is unquestionably going to be one of the biggest of 1999,'' Dergarabedian said.
Tom Sherak, the chairman of Fox's Domestic Film Group, said the idea for the early-in-the-week trailer, which was released nationally over the weekend, came from Lucas' associates.
``They said since they have such a big fan base, why not set something up just for the fans first and make sure it's shown to the rest of the public very quickly''? he said.
``The idea was to figure out a way to have fun with this.
`Star Wars' is part of the culture, but it's still a movie.
Let's treat it like a movie''.
Underscoring the box office impact of the trailer _ and the trailer alone _ were the substantial gains made on Tuesday night over Monday at theaters showing it.
At the Mann Theater in the Westwood section of Los Angeles, near the University of California, ``The Siege'' took in $13,000 on Tuesday night; it had taken in only $1,000 on Monday night.
At the Union Square Theater 14 in Manhattan, ``Meet Joe Black'' grossed $6,300 on Monday night, but $10,800 on Tuesday night.
The new ``Star Wars'' is the first of three planned prequels that will go back in time a full generation and detail the story of Anakin Skywalker's transformation into the mysterious and sinister Darth Vader.
In the new film, Skywalker is a 9-year-old boy and Obi-Wan Kenobi is a brash young Jedi knight.
Lucas himself has virtually total control over the film.
Not only has he put his personal fortune into it, he is in charge of its promotion and distribution.
No decisions are made without his approval.
The trailer itself shows glimpses of some of the film's stars: Ewan McGregor as Obi-Wan Kenobi; Liam Neeson as his mentor, Qui-Gon Jinn; Natalie Portman as the young Queen and Jake Lloyd as the young Anakin Skywalker.
Samuel L.
Jackson and Terence Stamp are also in the cast.
(STORY CAN END HERE.
OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS) Whatever the mystique of ``Star Wars,'' the reaction to the trailer seemed to burn up the Internet.
It has been shown on the ``Star Wars'' Lucasfilm Web site, and was widely videotaped by fans when it was shown on ``Entertainment Tonight'' and ``Access Hollywood''.
``The trailer felt like five seconds,'' said Harry Knowles, who founded the Ain't-It-Cool-News Web site (www.aint-it-cool-news.com), which is populated by movie fans obsessed with ``Star Wars''.
Over the Internet, Knowles seemed stricken with guilt about his early qualms about the new ``Star Wars''.
``I hate myself for every doubt I had,'' he said.
``What on earth was I ever thinking?
Analyzing every nugget, every whisper.
Worrying about reshoots and deadlines.
George seems to be 100 percent on his game''.
Other fans, on the Internet, talked about weeping and shaking while watching the trailer.
On Knowles' Web site, a fan named David Chung summed up his feelings: ``What can I say!
George Lucas must be a superior form of life!''
With about two weeks to go before the release of the new film ``Star Wars: Episode 1 _ The Phantom Menace,'' there are so many ``Star Wars'' sites on the Web that the creator of one site, Jedi Temple (www.spiderspace.net/jeditemple), felt compelled to list his favorite 100.
And that barely scratched the surface.
Hardly a shred of information or rumor about the $115 million ``Star Wars'' film has escaped legions of wired ``Star Wars'' enthusiasts.
``The information is pouring in like crazy from all over the world,'' said Steve Head, one of a dozen co-editors of The Force.net (www.theforce.net), a popular fan-created Web site that promises Web surfers ``your daily dose of `Star Wars'''.
``We used to have to fish for information,'' said Head, a 33-year-old real-estate marketing representative.
``Now the fish are flying out of the water''.
Many Web fans promptly package what they know (or think they know) and post it on sites that include clever design, often using stunning homemade artwork and computer graphics.
There are even homemade films that include take-offs on ``Star Wars'' characters, like ``Kung Fu Kenobi's Big Adventure'' (at The Force.net), one of several parodies made by Evan Mather, a 29-year-old landscape architect in Seattle.
``It's just taken on a life of its own,'' Lou Tambone said of his site at www.starwarz.com.
While he said that he is not a ``fanboy,'' mildly pejorative slang for an aggressively obsessive ``Star Wars'' fan, he did mention that the John Williams ``Star Wars'' theme was played at his wedding reception two years ago.
And on the wedding cake were figurines of Princess Leia and Han Solo.
Tambone, who is 29 and lives in Boston, said the Internet's relatively low cost, capacity for graphics and digital effects, and global reach made it a natural medium for the generation that grew up on ``Star Wars''.
Todd Boyd, a professor at the University of Southern California School of Cinema and Television, agreed.
``The core audience of the Internet is the core audience of `Star Wars,''' he said.
The strong affinity among ``Star Wars'' fans for the Web has not been lost on the film's producers, who have answered the flood of fan sites with a deluge of hype of their own.
``What we found out was that a great way to communicate with our fans was through our Web site,'' said Jim Ward, director of marketing for Lucas' company, Lucasfilm Ltd.
``Rather than simply being a marketing device, we discovered that it is really a medium for entertainment and beyond''.
The site (www.starwars.com) offers its millions of Web visitors something new: truly insider information, production photographs and the occasional scoop.
It was on the site that Lucasfilm first released the name of the film, ``The Phantom Menace''.
It also used the site to announce the company's decision _ since rescinded _ to offer no advance ticket sales for ``The Phantom Menace'' for fear of ticket scalping.
When the film's first two-minute trailers went on the Internet last November, Web servers offering the teaser were swamped.
When the second trailer went on line in March, more than a million people downloaded it in a single day.
But long before Lucasfilm's publicity machine was thrown into hyperdrive, sites like www.jedinet.com, Starwarz and the Holocron (www.holocron.simplenet.com) were lush oases for those thirsting for speculation and gossip about the first ``Star Wars'' film in 16 years.
Newsdroid (www.newsdroid.com), subtitled Headline News for Star Wars Fans, recently explored the persistent rumor that Jake Lloyd, the child actor who portrays Darth Vader as a boy in the new film, has had his speaking parts redone by another child actor.
On Holocron, articles delve into such weighty topics as similarities between ``Star Wars'' and ``Gone With the Wind''.
One writer notes, for example, that in ``Star Wars'' the ``empire enslaves entire planets; the South enslaved an entire race''.
On several sites there is a petition drive to have a special card in a ``Star Wars'' board game be made to honor the memory of Steven Curnow, a 14-year-old ``Star Wars'' fan who was shot and killed at Columbine High School in April in Littleton, Colo.
Practically every other mouse click on these sites leads to downloadable ``Star Wars'' photographs, screen savers, sounds, animated graphics, fan-made movie shorts and cartoons.
There are also links to collectibles for sale and trade, backgrounds on characters, vehicles and weapons, and well-marked ``spoilers'' _ glimpses, with words and sometimes pictures, of the new film's much-guarded plotline.
Some Webmasters of ``Star Wars'' sites claim to have pirated versions of the film's shooting script, a kind of bible they use to weed out wild rumors about how the action unfolds in the film.
And many claim to have vast networks of contacts and spies working on the film and many of its toy and promotional campaigns who feed the sites with provocative tidbits.
&QL; nn News Service &QC; When ``Star Wars'' blasted into movie theaters in 1977, the Internet was hardly a household word; it would be almost 20 years before the World Wide Web would begin appearing in American homes.
And nowhere among the futuristic light sabers and X-wing fighters was there a glimpse of anything that even slightly resembled the Net, which is a shame.
If Princess Leia could have just sent the rebels the stolen plans for the Death Star in an e-mail attachment (cc: Obi-Wan Kenobi), she could have saved everyone a lot of trouble.
But the Internet and PC-inspired technology appear to be exerting some influence on the look of the new ``Star Wars'' film, ``The Phantom Menace''.
For example, while there is still no explicit mention of anything like the Web on exotic planets like Naboo and Coruscant, there are a series of spiffy view screens that look like Palm Pilots you might find in a galaxy far, far away.
In tune with the esthetic sensibilities George Lucas has insisted upon for his ``Star Wars'' films, these view screens have the decidedly worn, retrofuturistic look of handheld computers that have seen better days.
``That's George's whole design philosophy, to make things very believable,'' said Doug Chiang, director of concept design for ``Phantom''.
The view screens, which Chiang said were not really supposed to be stand-ins for laptops and such, appear to be fashioned from alien metals and have organic details, like handles made from animal bones.
One even looks like a cross between a hand mirror and an old microphone from the golden age of radio.
``They're small versions of a TV set,'' Chiang said, adding that there was no real equivalent of the Internet in the new movie.
Lucas' idea is that technological evolution in the ``Star Wars'' universe occurred quite differently than it did on Earth, Chiang said.
The view screens, inspired by drawings made by Chiang, are mostly used in the film to permit characters to see things difficult to see otherwise, like a child who is far away.
The view screens are somewhat like computer screens linked to Webcams.
``Well, you see it, but it is never explained in the movie,'' Chiang conceded.
``George doesn't like to focus on the technology.''
Does any adventure series have a greater _ and more supremely deserved _ reservoir of good will going for it than ``Star Wars''?
At a preview screening last week in San Francisco, the keyed-up audience for ``Star Wars: Episode I _ The Phantom Menace'' cheered the dimming of the lights before the film even began.
They cheered the Lucasfilm logo.
They even cheered Rupert (talk about an evil empire)!
Murdoch's 20th Century Fox logo.
They cheered the slogan ``A long time ago in a galaxy far, far away''.
Truth to tell, there were more cheers at the beginning than there were, almost 2 1/4 hours later, at the end.
Right off the bat, Ewan McGregor, as the young Obi-Wan Kenobi, echoes Han Solo's ``I have a bad feeling about this''.
It would be merely clever and terribly unfair to say ``Star Wars'' fans might share that sentiment.
Is ``The Phantom Menace'' worth seeing?
What a question!
Of course it is.
It is a stunning spectacle, maybe even Industrial Light &AMP; Magic's greatest special-effects achievement.
But creator George Lucas has left a lot of room for improvement, particularly for character development and emotional juice, in this beginning of the second trilogy.
We have every right to assume _ to demand _ that the next two episodes will accomplish exactly that.
For the moment, there are high hopes for a promise not yet fully satisfied.
The most distinctive thing about ``The Phantom Menace,'' which opens Wednesday, is the extraordinary degree to which it is animation _ far, far and away more so than any previous ``Star Wars''.
An accurate categorization of it would be sci-fi, live-action animated feature.
From richly imagined new computer-generated characters who interact uncannily with the human actors to a strategically paced bonanza of extended, huge-scale, self-contained sequences, the computer-generated animation is a marvel of solidity, density, color subtlety and 3-D depth.
It is truly out there.
The action introduces us to Anakin Skywalker, the 9-year-old we already know will become not only Darth Vader but also the father of Luke Skywalker and Princess Leia.
Two Jedi knights, dispatched as ambassadors to broker peace between the intergalactic Trade Federation and the idealistic planet Naboo, believe that they have discovered along the way the Chosen One who will bring the galaxy into equilibrium with the Force.
Remember the Force?
It's not the seat-rattling sound that rumbles through the theater when spaceships accelerate, but it could've fooled me.
The new computer-generated creature Jar Jar Binks also brings off the illusion.
A buddy of Jedi knights Qui-Gon Jinn (Liam Neeson) and Obi-Wan Kenobi (McGregor), Jar Jar kind of fills the Chewbacca vacuum.
He has droopy ears, bulging eyes on stems and a humanoid torso.
He's got an anteater's wandering tongue and a hipster's walk, put to delightful use in a dance of celebration with New Orleans-style prancing droids.
Ironically in ``The Phantom Menace,'' the animated characters have more human juice to them than the live ones.
The humans, low-key and one-dimensional, are the stick figures.
This new trilogy needs a lovable rascal like Han Solo and a bitchy, bossy princess like Leia _ somebody to set off some sparks.
The stolid Neeson is warmer than anyone has a right to expect, and even his Buddhist platitudes (``Be mindful of the moment'') are never burdensome.
My favorite: ``The ability to speak does not make them intelligent''.
The prevailing message is: We must learn to help one another.
McGregor is more of a problem.
As the living prequel to the saint of the series, in a brush cut with a topknot that seems to have slipped down the back of his head, McGregor seldom shows his natural vivacity as an actor and, especially, his unpredictability.
An Alec Guinness imitation is interesting only up to a point.
Natalie Portman has grown up from the 11-year-old urchin in Luc Besson's ``The Professional'' and now is a regal, perhaps too regal, queen of Naboo and something of a clothes horse.
One of her costumes recalls the Elizabethan age, and another is very Japanese.
She has one stripe of lip gloss on her lower lip, and it's likely that teenage girls already are imitating it.
There are some shocks and surprises along the way, and Portman is involved in one of the best.
The big question about Anakin Skywalker (Jake Lloyd), to my mind, is what planted the seeds that led to his embracing the dark side of the Force as Darth Vader.
As yet, we don't know.
A slightly younger but still wispy-haired Yoda says that ``fear is the path to the dark side,'' but the Anakin we see is resourceful and brave.
He's already involved in the creation of a see-through C-3P0 droid, and the nearby prototype of R2-D2 is greeted by the audience like an old friend.
Fighter-pilot son Luke will be a chip off the old block, as we see in Anakin's entry in the pod race.
The cab of his aircraft, by the way, sometimes hangs behind the free-floating jets and, in the twists and turns through canyons, sometimes precedes them.
&UR; &QL; &LR; &UR; (MORE) &LR; &QL; The battles and other set pieces, such as the pod race, go off like a carefully timed string of firecrackers.
The computer-generated landscapes, cityscapes and seascapes are awesome.
An underwater city is surrounded by an increasingly ripping series of marine monsters that sequentially gobble each other up.
``There's always a bigger fish,'' Neeson observes drily.
The cityscapes range from pre-Mayan and Babylonian to Venetian canals and the precipitous, illuminated towers of skyscrapers.
One battle takes place on an enormous plain, and a climactic lightsaber fight is waged among ramps, platforms and infinitely deep crevasses.
Among the creatures are ants-on-their-hind-feet cannon fodder called battle droids.
Another new one is the greedy, winged slave master of Anakin.
His bet with Qui-Gon Jinn leads up to the pod race.
The ever-resourceful Jedi knight has a jujitsu-like knowledge of how to let an opponent defeat himself.
The celebratory scene, a hallmark of Lucas' films and, I think, of his philosophy, features some of John Williams' new music, which otherwise tends to fade from consciousness with overfamiliarity.
Jar Jar, by the way, sometimes seems to sound like the Central American houseboy in Robin Williams' ``The Birdcage''.
There are other intriguing dialect choices, such as the Federation reps who seem to speak English with a Mandarin accent.
Before Tuesday's show started, a representative of the publicity agency presenting the screening asked audience members to report any camcorders they spotted among them.
Piracy is a serious international problem, of course, but anybody who sees a shaky copy of ``The Phantom Menace'' on a small screen with tinny sound is missing the point.
The need for the ``special edition'' remake of Episodes IV, V and VI, adding landscapes and cityscapes to put the action in a more believable context, must have arisen during creation of the extraordinary environment for ``The Phantom Menace''.
People may have forgotten how low-rent and underpopulated the original ``Star Wars'' was in 1977, with its tacky sets and ragtag little kids disguised in hoods.
In special effects, Lucas has moved a galaxy beyond.
In energy, not yet.
&UR; STAR WARS: EPISODE I _ THE PHANTOM MENACE: &LR; Science fiction.
Written and directed by George Lucas.
Starring Liam Neeson, Ewan McGregor, Natalie Portman and Jake Lloyd.
(Rated PG.
133 minutes.
Opening Wednesday).
&QL; &UR; (For use by New York Times News Service clients) &QL; &LR;
LOS ANGELES (AP) --Now that a few people have actually seen the new ``Star Wars'' movie in special screenings, the hype has yielded to the buzz.
And the buzz is...
well, don't expect a masterpiece, just a really good movie with cool special effects.
In other words, a certain summer blockbuster.
``Star Wars: Episode I --The Phantom Menace'' was screened Tuesday night in eight North American cities for movie theater executives, their families, and -- apparently -- a bundle of ``Star Wars'' fans who somehow finagled some of the prized tickets.
Almost immediately, early reviews hit cyberspace, followed by the reactions to the reviews, then the reactions to the reactions, along with all manner of claims, counterclaims, insults and soul-searching over the film, which opens nationwide May 19.
``Guys, it's a movie''! responded Tom Sherak, distribution head of 20th Century Fox, which is releasing the film for George Lucas.
``It isn't the Bible!
It's fun, it's enjoyable, it's escapism.
But it's a movie''.
Uh huh.
In what was titled, ``What I believe to be the FIRST review anywhere on the Internet,'' Ronald Epstein wrote on his Home Theater Forum Web site (www.hometheaterforum.com) that while he was impressed, the movie may not satisfy hard-core ``Star Wars'' fans.
``It looks like 'Star Wars,' it smells like 'Star Wars' and it feels like 'Star Wars'.
However, is it a 'Star Wars' that we are going to walk away satisfied with?
Well ...
perhaps, but not for everyone,'' Epstein wrote.
While the early amateur critics loved the action sequences and most of the effects, including what they found to be an incredible underwater sequence, some reviewers thought the 2-hour-plus movie dragged a bit in places, that it was a little too kid-oriented and that one of the computer-generated characters, Jar Jar Binks, was annoying.
Such views, however, were quickly countered by those who, like Jerry Rhoades on Home Theater Forum, found the movie to be ``PHENOMENAL''!!!!
``Don't watch it to analyze and match other people's reviews and thoughts to the film, just sit back, relax and enjoy the ride,'' he said.
``I did''.
On a leading ``Star Wars'' Web site, www.theforce.net, a writer using the nickname BetterJedi wrote, ``Wow!
What a film.
I'm going to have to see it about 10 or 15 times to take it all in''.
But another writer, going by Job21, wasn't as impressed.
``It was a dream come true at first but quickly turned into a nightmare,'' Job21 said.
That was countered by a fuselage of reaction from fans, many of whom raised doubts about whether Job even saw the movie, pointing out his review noticeably lacked the kinds of details that would suggest he was there.
As for the theater operators themselves, they gave their usual tempered thumbs-up --they praised the movie just enough to avoid losing any customers but not so much that Lucas could extract higher fees for showing the film.
The bottom line, financially, is the early buzz --or for that matter the reactions from the professional critics who see ``Phantom'' Friday night -- won't mean a thing initially, said Paul Dergarabedian, of box office tracker Exhibitor Relations Co.
Inc. ``This movie is critic-proof,'' he said.
``I think it doesn't matter what anybody says, good, bad or indifferent.
The film is going to play big in those first two weeks without question''.
After that ...
the Force only knows .
TOKYO (AP) --Kabuki-style makeup.
Samurai-style swordplay.
A director who confesses a love for the work of Akira Kurosawa.
The ``Star Wars'' space fantasy series holds a special appeal for the Japanese, who see it as an updated version of classic samurai films.
The first ``Star Wars'' movie was inspired in part by ``The Hidden Fortress,'' a 1958 film about a warrior's journey by Kurosawa, Japan's most renowned director.
Fans in Japan were quick to find elements of Japan's feudal warlord culture in the 1977 movie, citing everything from the design of villainous Darth Vader's costume to the samurai-style swordplay, albeit with lightsabers.
Director George Lucas, in Tokyo on Wednesday to plug the new film, acknowledged his debt to Kurosawa.
``He's just a master that you work toward (hoping) that someday you can reach that level,'' Lucas said.
Even so, audiences here won't get a look at the film until opening day, July 10.
Although ``Star Wars: Episode I --The Phantom Menace'' opened in the United States and Canada on May 19, it won't be released in many Asian and European nations until mid- to late summer.
For many Japanese fans, that's just too much to ask.
Hiroshi Kobayashi, a 27-year-old graduate student whose business card reads ``Star Wars Evangelist,'' was one of 30 Japanese fans who flew to Los Angeles last month to see the new film.
The lack of Japanese subtitles made the dialogue hard to follow, but he still gave it a thumbs up.
``It had a great visual impact,'' he said.
After its release in the United States, ``The Phantom Menace'' earned more than $205 million in a record 13 days.
Industry experts here are optimistic.
Most expect it to go over well with the Japanese audience.
Toshio Furusawa, 20th Century Fox's marketing director in Japan, said pre-release ticket sales have been strong and that demand for 4,000 passes to a ``Star Wars'' fan event held last month exceeded availability by 30 times.
``The movie looks like it was made for audiences in Japan,'' said Japanese film critic Yuichi Tanuma, who attended a special showing for the media last month in Tokyo.
He said ``The Phantom Menace'' has touches of Japanese influence in the Kabuki-style facial makeup sported by the evil Darth Maul and Zen-like meditation practiced by the heroic Jedi knights.
SEATTLE _ The Force pulsates through the front door.
Turn the knob.
Walk in.
Slowly. Look out!
It's Darth Vader, 7 feet tall, leering in the foyer.
His red and green chest lights flash mean and fast.
Dash to the bedroom.
More trouble.
A blaster-toting Imperial Stormtrooper is crouched in a corner.
Gotta escape!
Where? Think.
The back patio.
Almost there....
A few more steps....
Oh no!
Boba Fett is blocking the way _ and his laser is about to get personal.
Doom looms.
Then, from out of the blue, a voice of salvation: ``How would you like some of my world-famous spaghetti sauce''?
Welcome to the universe _ actually the Kirkland, Wash.
, home _ of Lauren Bock, where a zeal for ``Star Wars'' and homemade Italian cooking makes for out-of-this-world fun.
Bock and his family are among the top collectors of ``Star Wars'' memorabilia in the Pacific Northwest.
He has almost every boxed action figure connected to George Lucas' popular movie trilogy.
All told, more than 4,000 4-inch and 12-inch ``Star Wars'' dolls, including vintage items, populate his home.
Now, with excitement building for next month's premiere of ``Star Wars: Episode I _ The Phantom Menace,'' it's boom time for Bock and other collectors.
Last week, a video crew from cable TV's Sci-Fi Channel dropped by to tape a show due out in early May.
The topic?
``Star Wars'' uber-fans.
Bock says he has been spending $100-a-day on stuff related to the saga _ from bar soap with a tiny R2D2 inside to his latest find: Star Wars shampoo.
Since the series kicked off in the late 1970s, sales of ``Star Wars'' toys, games, soundtracks and books have topped $4 billion, according to Warman's Today's Collector Magazine, a leading trade publication.
And `Phantom's'' spinoff sales alone could break the $1 billion mark, analysts say.
In recent years, Bock has forked out tens of thousands of dollars for his still-growing stash.
The 57-year-old retired insurance adjuster got his purchasing power after taking a big gamble: He sold off two rental properties and put the profits, along with part of an inheritance, into Microsoft stock in the late '80s.
``My toy money,'' he jokes.
A 5-by-6-foot model of the spaceship Millennium Falcon, its gun turrets pumping red lasers, swoops from his living room ceiling.
A television, 65 inches wide, blares ``The Empire Strikes Back'' (Bock's favorite flick).
The walls of his hallways are blanketed with signed pictures from stars of the space trilogy.
Need to go to the bathroom?
Be forewarned... eyes from hundreds of creatures from a galaxy far, far away will be on you.
But these items are just the trailer before the main attraction.
Bock's best stuff is in an upstairs bedroom and in the basement.
Both rooms are brimming with ``Star Wars'' paraphernalia: Two pinball machines, two stand-alone arcade games and two wood-and-glass cases chock-full of dolls, ceramic cookie jars and Frisbee-size rubber molds used to make ``Star Wars'' commemorative coins.
``It's just so much fun,'' Bock gushes, his arms spread high and wide.
``God, it's great''!
It's the second Wednesday of April, and Bock's home is officially Sarlacc's Pit _ named after Lucas' omnivorous, multi-tentacled creature with sharp teeth.
Pit members have fashioned an appropriate acronym: Seattle ARea Lucasfilm Artifacts Collectors Club.
The monthly gathering brings together more than 40 people who watch ``Star Wars'' videos, dress up in movie costumes and weigh the latest flick gossip.
They also clear up misinformation _ the bane of the serious collector.
But in no way, they insist, do members ``geek out''.
``We are not like Trekkies,'' says one visitor.
This meeting, however, is particularly festive.
Maybe it's because the prequel is about a month away, or because the sun is out or because the Sci-Fi Channel crew is giddy to have the members circle a table and parody a meeting of Alcoholics Anonymous.
(``Hi, my name is Bill.
I'm a Star War-holic'').
In any case, light sabers are swinging.
One pair of excited members, wielding toy sabers that go vhronn
NEW YORK (AP) --With ``Star Wars'' mania heating up across the nation, retailers are gearing up for what's expected to be one of the biggest rollouts of licensed merchandise in history.
Toys R Us is expected to announce on Wednesday that most of its 1,500 stores will open at 12:01 a.m. on May 3, the first day that merchants are permitted to sell goods based on ``Star Wars: Episode I --The Phantom Menace''.
The Paramus, N.J.-based retailer also plans to dedicate a large area of its stores entirely to the ``Star Wars'' line.
Wal-Mart Stores Inc.
, the nation's biggest retailer, told The Associated Press that it also plans to offer a vast selection of ``Star Wars'' items beginning on May 3.
``Star Wars''-related goods --from snack foods to body lotion to skateboards -- will be found in 16 of the 36 different departments in Wal-Mart's stores.
``Wal-Mart is supporting this film with more movie-related merchandise than any other film in our history,'' said Les Copeland, spokesman for Bentonville, Ark.-based Wal-Mart.
Analysts expect sales of merchandise tied to the movie could top $2 billion this year alone, with an estimated $1 billion coming from toy sales.
The movie debuts May 19.
Merchants expect anxious ``Star Wars'' fans --oth children and avid adult collectors -- to begin lining up well-before midnight on May 3, hoping to be one of the first to get a glimpse of the movie merchandise.
``Star Wars'' director George Lucas signed strict licensing deals with manufacturers that prevented them from releasing virtually all information on their products to the general public, including the media.
Lucas, who financed the $115 million movie himself, also chose the May 3 launch date for the merchandise to hit store shelves.
Given the huge demand for this merchandise, merchants will keep the ``Star Wars'' goods under lock-and-key until they can begin stocking store shelves late on May 2.
NEW YORK (AP) --The Force is with ``Star Wars'' fans, and it's telling them to hit the toy stores early and spend, spend, spend.
The most-hyped line of movie-themed merchandise in history --for the still unreleased ``Star Wars: Episode I -- The Phantom Menace'' -- is finally going on sale on a studio-imposed schedule, and fans and retailers aren't wasting a minute.
In an unprecedented move, Toys R Us stores around the country decided to open their doors at 12:01 a.m.
Monday for an all-night selling marathon of toys based on the movie.
Some FAO Schwarz stores planned to open from midnight to 2 a.m.
Wal-Mart and Kmart called in extra staff for their 24-hour stores to handle the post-midnight crowds.
Many stores planned to limit the number of items a customer could buy to prevent immediate sell-outs.
By 6 p.m.
EDT, some fans were already lining up to get first dibs on the new merchandise.
``We've been getting lots of phone calls and there are already people out there,'' said Randy Perkins, a manager at the Wal-Mart store in Rome, N.Y.
``We expect this to be a busy night''.
Even the virtual stores were ready for middle-of-the-night surfers with an itch to buy.
Internet merchants Amazon.com and eToys planned to open their online ``Star Wars'' stores just after midnight.
Fans had been waiting for months to get a glimpse of the vast array of goods --from action figures to wigs to body lotion to snack food -- tied to the movie, which opens May 19.
But LucasFilm Ltd.
had signed strict licensing deals that prevented manufacturers from releasing virtually any information about their products ahead of time.
As a result, people had been speculating for months, especially on the Internet, about what the toys and other merchandise would be.
``Right now, people are just frothing at the mouth,'' said Omaha resident Dean Phillips, a ``Star Wars'' merchandise collector.
Jeff Van Pelt had already figured out that he'd spend about $150 at Toys R Us on Monday morning.
``I have gone online, gotten a list of things that's expected to come out, so I have an idea of what I'm getting,'' said Van Pelt of Concord, N.H.
Die-hard fans who turned out for a Star Wars convention in Denver on Friday got a sneak-peek at some of the merchandise.
There were eight basic action figures, which are 3 3/4 inches tall, including the Jedi knight Obi-Wan Kenobi as a young man; Anakin Skywalker, the father of Luke Skywalker and the man who later became Darth Vader; Jar Jar Binks, a new space creature; and Queen Amidala, the leader of the ``good'' side.
The action figures retail for $7 to $8, while related computer gear to make them talk costs an additional $20 to $25.
A collection of Queen Amidala fashion dolls also was introduced.
And there was a 3-D diorama that recreates memorable movie scenes.
Analysts estimate that sales of merchandise tied to the movie could top $2 billion this year alone, with an estimated $1 billion coming just from toys.
Many stores kept the ``Star Wars'' merchandise locked up until late Sunday, when they began stocking shelves.
At some stores, managers were not even permitted to see the merchandise until the last minute.
Some stores created a party atmosphere for the late-night crowds.
At a Toys R Us in southeast Oklahoma City, there was a costume contest as well as a tent set up where they could watch the first ``Star Wars'' movies.
In Omaha, the Toys R Us served cakes in the shape of ``Star Wars'' characters.
&LR; LOS ANGELES _ Just when you thought the hype had subsided, ``Star Wars'' fans are flooding the Internet with impassioned pleas to pack the theaters once again.
You'd think George Lucas himself was behind the international movement, but two Internet site creators operating out of Maryland are claiming credit for the idea.
June 19, they have proclaimed, will be Fan Day.
In celebration of ``Star Wars: Episode I _ The Phantom Menace's'' one-month anniversary, they want devotees to gather their friends, dress as their favorite characters and go see the movie over and over again, just like on opening day of the much-anticipated prequel.
Their plan: Dethrone ``Titanic,'' current king of the box-office gross chart.
It's a lofty goal, considering the movie had only climbed to 11th-highest grosser of all time as of close of business Thursday, reaping a total of $271.3 million by its 23rd day in theaters.
``Forrest Gump'' and ``Lion King'' were still ahead of the ``Phantom''.
But Simon Daoudi, 21, of Tarzana, Calif.
, is paying no mind to the movie pundits who have widely declared ``Phantom'' an attendance dud.
``We're just trying to get people to enjoy the movie and believe in `Star Wars' again _ and try to make it pass `Titanic,''' said Daoudi, the self-anointed man in charge of Los Angeles' Fan Day.
The Pierce College student is occupying much of his time trying to spread the word about Fan Day.
He's circulating Fan Day fliers.
He's making up Fan Day badges that participants can wear around their necks that day.
He's even tried recruiting toy stores and movie theaters to sponsor and host the event.
But talk about a phantom menace.
Many of his efforts have fallen flat.
Toy companies aren't interested in supplying free lightsabers to fans in line.
And a disappointed Daoudi discovered last week that Mann's Chinese Theater in Hollywood, site of all the craze on opening day, won't even be showing the film anymore by the time Fan Day arrives.
Sandy Baker, vice president of marketing for Mann Theaters, said taking ``Phantom'' off the schedules at Mann's Chinese and its Westwood Village locations after June 17 was decided long before the movie debuted.
``Regardless of what happened, that was just the deal that we made with Fox,'' said Baker.
The film, she said, met Mann's expectations for attendance, with long lines waiting to get in at both theaters during the first week.
But the crowds diminished after that, and on Friday, ``The General's Daughter'' will replace ``Phantom'' on the marquee.
``They go, `It's been there long enough.
We gotta show other movies,' '' Daoudi said.
``I go, in my head, `Stupid mooove'.
'' But he pressed on, redirecting local fans to celebrate at Burbank's AMC 14 theater, which is scheduled to begin showing the film in its new digital format starting Friday.
AMC officials, however, are distancing themselves from Fan Day.
``We've learned that anything, particularly connected to `Star Wars,' is a very sensitive issue,'' said Richard Fay, president of AMC.
Fay said this was the first he'd heard of any individual or group promoting the movie as an event a month after its opening.
And while the intentions are good, even he had doubts that the fan-driven campaign could help ``Phantom'' steal ``Titanic's'' top spot.
``It's an interesting idea, but they've got a long way to go to do that,'' Fay said.
``But anything is possible, especially, as I've learned, when it comes to movies''.
&UR; &QL;
HONG KONG (AP) --A week after the new Star Wars blockbuster opened in the United States, pirated copies have already hit store shelves in Hong Kong and Macau.
Pirated video CDs of ``Star Wars Episode I: The Phantom Menace'' are widely available in shopping malls for Hong Kong for $3.20 to $3.80, the South China Morning Post reported Thursday.
In nearby Macau, the pirated VCDs are selling for about $1.50.
The ``Star Wars'' film, which began screening in the United States last Wednesday, is scheduled to be screened in Hong Kong in July.
It became the fastest movie to reach $100 million (five days, versus six for ``The Lost World: Jurassic Park.'').
Despite rampant crack downs by customs officials, pirated CDs, VCDs and software are still widely available in Hong Kong and Macau.
TOKYO (AP) --Brandishing light sabers, Japanese ``Star Wars'' fans welcomed the opening Saturday of the hit film in the land credited with inspiring the saga.
Hundreds lined up as early as Friday morning at select theaters for a special countdown ceremony for the arrival of ``Star Wars: Episode I --The Phantom Menace''.
Some wore costumes of Darth Vader, Yoda and other ``Star Wars'' characters.
And the crowd broke out into a cheer when the film finally began.
``The special effects are so awesome,'' said Shingo Oyama, a 19-year-old college student, lining up with a friend outside a Tokyo theater.
Like many others, Oyama has seen all three previous ``Star Wars'' films and was dead set on seeing the latest on opening day.
The film's makers have made no secret that the work owes much to Asian influences: the kimono-like costuming, the sword-fighting scenes, the Kabukiesque makeup, and, of course, the epic fable of good vs.
evil. Director George Lucas, who came to Japan in person last month to plug the film, is an avid fan of the late Japanese filmmaker Akira Kurosawa.
Some Asian-Americans have complained about stereotyping.
But the Japanese haven't minded a bit, seeming to see it all as an honor.
For months, TV shows here have featured hype on the film, sometimes showing off ``Star Wars'' products like action figures and T-shirts.
Die-hards, who couldn't wait to see the movie, went all the way to the United States, where it opened May 19.
With such anticipation, the arrival of the film at more than 400 theaters nationwide was a jubilant affair.
At the Miyukiza theater in Tokyo more than 1,000 people packed three showings.
``They were clapping from joy, shaking their light sabers,'' said theater employee Akinari Matsumoto.
But not all gave the film a thumbs-up.
``The visual effects were fantastic, but there wasn't much content to the story,'' said Shinichiro Oka, a 31-year-old computer engineer.
``Still, seeing `Star Wars' is an important thing to do.
It was worthwhile.''
LOS ANGELES (AP) --Summer blockbuster?
Without a doubt.
A sci-fi masterpiece that will please all its fans?
Probably not, but it's got some cool effects.
That's the buzz on the new ``Star Wars'' movie, now that it has been finally seen by a select few.
``Star Wars: Episode I --The Phantom Menace'' was screened Tuesday night in eight North American cities for movie theater executives, their families and -- apparently -- a bundle of ``Star Wars'' fans who somehow finagled some tickets.
Almost immediately, early reviews hit cyberspace, followed by the reactions to the reviews, then the reactions to the reactions, along with all manner of counterclaims and insults over the movie, which opens nationwide May 19.
``Guys, it's a movie''! responded Tom Sherak, distribution head of 20th Century Fox, which is releasing the film for George Lucas.
``It isn't the Bible!
It's fun, it's enjoyable, it's escapism.
But it's a movie''.
Uh huh.
In what was titled ``What I believe to be the FIRST review anywhere on the Internet,'' Ronald Epstein wrote on his Home Theater Forum Web site (www.hometheaterforum.com) that while he was impressed, the movie may not satisfy hard-core ``Star Wars'' fans.
``It looks like `Star Wars,' it smells like `Star Wars' and it feels like `Star Wars'.
However, is it a `Star Wars' that we are going to walk away satisfied with?
Well...
perhaps, but not for everyone,'' Epstein wrote.
While the amateur critics loved the action sequences and most of the effects, including what they found to be an incredible underwater sequence, some reviewers thought the two-hour-plus movie dragged a bit in places, that it was a little too kid-oriented and that one of the computer-generated characters, Jar Jar Binks, was annoying.
Such views were quickly countered by those who, like Jerry Rhoades on Home Theater Forum, pronounced movie ``PHENOMENAL''!!!!
``Don't watch it to analyze and match other people's reviews and thoughts to the film, just sit back, relax and enjoy the ride,'' he said.
``I did''.
On a leading ``Star Wars'' Web site, www.theforce.net, a writer using the nickname BetterJedi wrote: ``Wow!
What a film.
I'm going to have to see it about 10 or 15 times to take it all in''.
But another writer, going by Job21, wasn't as impressed.
``It was a dream come true at first but quickly turned into a nightmare,'' Job21 said.
That was countered by a fusillade of reaction from fans, many of whom questioned whether Job had even seen the movie, pointing out his review lacked the details that would suggest he was there.
Financially, the early buzz --or for that matter the reactions from the professional critics who see ``Phantom'' Friday night -- won't mean a thing initially, said Paul Dergarabedian of box office tracker Exhibitor Relations Co.
``This movie is critic-proof,'' he said.
``I think it doesn't matter what anybody says, good, bad or indifferent.
The film is going to play big in those first two weeks without question''.
After that ...
only the Force knows .
LOS ANGELES (AP) --The ``Star Wars'' prequel is setting box-office records, but it is not alone.
``Star Wars: Episode I --The Phantom Menace'' was North America's top film over the four-day Memorial Day weekend, bringing in $64.8 million for a total gross of $205 million in a record 13 days.
``Independence Day'' set the previous record in 21 days in 1996.
But another kind of star power --Julia Roberts -- helped ``Notting Hill'' pull in $27.8 million, the biggest opening ever for a romantic comedy.
``The Wedding Singer,'' with Adam Sandler and Drew Barrymore, earned $21.9 million in three days last year.
The comparable three-day figure for ``Notting Hill'' was $22.2 million.
``Star Wars'' locked up the children's audience and the ``thrill ride'' fans, studio executives said, while the love story between Ms.
Roberts as a Hollywood star and Hugh Grant as a quirky British bookstore owner drew an older crowd for second place.
Still, the ``Star Wars'' film is flying.
It already holds records for opening day and five-day totals, and is the fastest to break the $100 million barrier (five days).
``The movie's like a thoroughbred.
We put it on the track every day and it doesn't disappoint you,'' said Tom Sherak, distribution head for 20th Century Fox.
He said families are the key to the repeat business if ``Phantom'' is to thrive in the summer blockbuster season.
Universal's strategy to open its films before and after ``Star Wars'' paid off.
``The Mummy,'' the studio's own thrill ride movie, was in third place last weekend with $12.7 million.
It has grossed $117.1 million in four weeks.
``The marketplace has got to support more than one movie.
There are different tastes,'' said Nikki Rocco, head of distribution for Universal.
The only other new film in wide release, ``The Thirteenth Floor,'' opened in fifth place.
The sci-fi film noir had a disappointing $4.3 million, industry estimates showed Monday.
``The Love Letter,'' also billed as a romantic alternative, tanked in its second week, dropping out of the top 10 list with a gross of $1.3 million.
Estimated grosses for Friday through Monday at North American theaters, according to Exhibitor Relations Co.
Inc.: 1.
``Star Wars: Episode I --The Phantom Menace,'' $64.8 million.
2. ``Notting Hill,'' $27.8 million.
3. ``The Mummy,'' $12.7 million.
4. ``Entrapment,'' $6.3 million.
5. ``The Thirteenth Floor,'' $4.3 million.
6. ``The Matrix,'' $3.1 million.
7. ``William Shakespeare's A Midsummer Night's Dream,'' $2.004 million.
8. ``Never Been Kissed,'' $2 million.
9. ``Life,'' $1.4 million.
10. ``Election,'' $1.38 million.
If waiting for the new ``Star Wars'' flick has you feeling like a famished Jabba the Hutt before the big feed, then Scott McWhinnie has a timely snack to sate your appetite.
McWhinnie is ``PEZident'' of Pez Candy, Inc.
, the maker of the popular plastic dispensers featuring toy heads that tilt back and eject pellet-size sweets.
His company, known for its dispensers of Minnie Mouse, Bugs Bunny and other characters, is heading into a galaxy far, far away.
Pez this month began selling four new ``Star Wars'' dispensers in anticipation of the frenzy leading up to the May 19 release of ``Episode I: The Phantom Menace''.
The new dispensers show the heads of Princess Leia, Luke Skywalker, Boba Fett and the furry-faced Ewoks.
The company already has other well-known ``Star Wars'' faces in its arsenal _ Darth Vader, C-3PO, Stormtroopers, Yoda and Chewbacca.
More are coming.
McWhinnie said that hooking up with one of the most eagerly anticipated movies of all time was a no-brainer.
``It's the synergy of all those lovers of ``Star Wars'' collectibles, and those people who want new things to add to their Pez collection,'' he said Tuesday from company headquarters in Orange, Conn.
``It's a big thing for us''.
It many ways it is deja vu, Pez-style.
In 1996, PEZ bigwigs trekked to Skywalker Ranch, the Northern California corporate office of ``Star Wars'' creator George Lucas, to discuss merging his characters with the candy that gets its name from the German word for peppermint _ pfefferminz.
``They loved us, we loved them,'' McWhinnie explained.
But Pez officials had no idea that in the following year _ 1997 _ the three movies in the ``Star Wars'' series would be restored and returned to the big screen.
So they were pleasantly surprised when their first wave of ``Star Wars'' Pez characters coincided with the re-release, generating sales that were out of this world.
``Our sales shot up 36 percent,'' McWhinnie said, adding the Stars Wars' re-release was ``a large factor'' in those gains.
Fast forward to 1999.
Pez officials hope the release of ``The Phantom Menace'' will create a similar boost, not to mention add new characters _ on top of the 150 characters currently in production _ to the Pez family.
For now, though, those plastic heads are under wraps _ until the ``Phantom'' appears.
``I can't tell you (about those) characters,'' McWhinnie said with a chuckle.
``I was at a private showing.
I had to sign my name to get in.''
BALTIMORE _ In the year he has suffered from osteoarthritis, Harold Katcoff has followed his doctors' advice, to no avail: aspirin, steroids, the latest anti-inflammatory drugs.
The pills, he says, offer little relief from the stabbing pain in the back of his knees.
So Katcoff, an 80-year-old retired pharmacist, is trying Chinese medicine instead.
Or at least, he thinks he is.
Every Tuesday and Thursday since late November, Katcoff has come here, to Kernan Hospital, to see an acupuncturist who pokes him with 20 needles, nine in each leg and two in the belly, and then hooks the probes to a mild electrical current.
The patient is convinced that the therapy works.
``It's fantastic,'' Katcoff says.
But in the same breath, he admits that he cannot be certain if the effect is real or imagined.
That is because Katcoff may be receiving sham acupuncture _ needle sticks in places where, according to the theories of traditional Chinese medicine, they should not do any good.
He is a volunteer in a $2.5 million federally financed study, run by a rheumatology professor and a family-practice doctor at the University of Maryland.
The study represents a new wave in academic medicine: the application of rigorous, Western scientific methods _ including the gold standard of medical research, the placebo, or fake therapy, as a control _ to test alternative therapies, from ginkgo biloba to shark cartilage to a mystical Chinese healing art known as qi gong.
Just five years ago, many academics would not have gone near such studies, for fear they would become laughingstocks.
And while alternative therapies remain hugely controversial in the stodgy world of science _ ``quackupuncture'' is how one vocal critic, Dr.
Victor Herbert of the Mount Sinai School of Medicine, summed up the University of Maryland's work _ large, multimillion-dollar clinical trials are getting under way this year at some of the nation's most prestigious university hospitals.
``The scientific games have begun,'' declared Dr.
David Eisenberg, director of the Center for Alternative Medicine Research and Education at Beth Israel Deaconness Medical Center in Boston.
Or, as Dr.
Barrie Cassileth, chief of integrative medicine at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan, said: ``The research is just coming into its maturity.
It's bar mitzvah time''.
The boom is being driven by the National Institutes of Health, which, under pressure from Congress, has sharply increased its budget for studies of alternative medicine.
Eight years ago, much to the chagrin of institute leaders, Congress required the institutes to establish an Office of Alternative Medicine, a tiny operation with a budget to match, just $2 million.
``It was,'' said Dr.
Daniel Moerman, a medical anthropologist at the University of Michigan, ``like setting up an office of deviltry within the Catholic Church''.
But after a rocky beginning, the office is gaining acceptance at the institutes and is setting the tone for scientists around the country.
Last year, Congress upgraded the office, making it the National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine, which means it now has grant-making authority.
Its yearly budget has grown to $68 million.
In October, a new director came on board, Dr.
Stephen E.
Straus, a virologist and longtime NIH insider whom Dr.
Harold Varmus, the former director of the institutes and once one of the program's biggest detractors, describes as ``a really distinguished scientist''.
At the same time, hospitals and medical schools are bowing to economic reality: alternative medicine is big business.
According to the Nutrition Business Journal, an industry trade publication, Americans spent $27.2 billion in 1998 on providers of alternative health care, including those in chiropractic, traditional Chinese medicine, homeopathy, naturopathy and massage therapy.
Sales of herbs are also growing, to $4.4 billion last year, from nearly $2.5 billion in 1995, the journal said.
A survey of more than 2,000 adults, conducted by Eisenberg and published in November 1998 in The Journal of the American Medical Association, estimated that 46 percent of the American population had visited a practitioner of alternative health care in 1997, up from 36 percent in 1990.
Patients like Katcoff, who had never before tried alternative therapies, are increasingly doing so.
``Consumers are saying, I want some type of care and I will pay for it out of pocket if I need to,'' said Dr.
Brian Berman, the principal investigator in the Maryland acupuncture study.
``I think that has been heard by the medical establishment''.
(STORY CAN END HERE.
OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS) But applying Western methods to Eastern traditions may be easier said than done, as Berman well knows.
For one thing, how do you do placebo acupuncture?
Berman and a Chinese colleague, Dr.
Lixing Lao, ran several experiments just to figure out a technique that, they say, can reliably fool patients.
And medical concepts do not easily translate.
The diagnosis ``osteoarthritis of the knee'' does not exist in traditional Chinese medicine.
The closest translation, Lao said, was ``the knee area is energy blocked''.
Cultural clashes aside, the work proceeds.
At Duke University, 330 patients are being enrolled in a study of St.
John's wort, an herb that is thought to relieve mild depression.
One-third of the participants will receive the herb, one-third will receive a placebo and one-third will receive Zoloft, a commonly prescribed drug.
In Houston, the M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center has just begun testing shark cartilage as a treatment for lung cancer; the study, sponsored by the National Cancer Institute and approved by the Food and Drug Administration, will involve as many as 700 patients who will receive either shark cartilage or a dummy pill in addition to conventional treatment.
And at the University of Michigan, Dr.
Steven F.
Bolling, a heart transplant surgeon who describes himself as ``the high priest of techno-medicine,'' is surprised to find himself examining whether practitioners of the Chinese art of qi gong can help his cardiac surgery patients recover faster.
One-third of the patients in the clinical trial will be visited by a qi gong master, who performs slow-motion exercises that are said to release a healing energy.
One-third will be visited by an impostor and one-third will not have visits.
``If it's proven, it works and it helps my patients,'' Bolling said, ``so be it''.
The trend is affecting the training of young doctors as well.
Two-thirds of the nation's medical schools now have courses on alternative medicine, many of them to teach doctors how to handle questions from patients.
Harvard Medical School is about to begin a fellowship program to train internists in how to conduct research on alternative therapies.
``We need a small army of clinician researchers who will do this work now,'' said Eisenberg, the co-director, ``and for the next generation''.
The story of how alternative medicine has worked its way into the mainstream of scientific research begins not with scientists, but politicians.
In the late 1980s, Sen.
Tom Harkin, D-Iowa, became chairman of the subcommittee that holds the purse strings to NIH.
At about that time, Harkin said, a friend, Rep.
Berkley Bedell, D-Iowa, became ill with Lyme disease and prostate cancer, and resigned from Congress.
``A couple of years after that, Berkley came to see me and he looked like a new man,'' Harkin said.
``He told me about a strange cure he had taken, an alternative approach.
I was just amazed''.
Harkin has since become an aficionado of alternative medicine himself: He takes bee pollen for his allergies, a practice that critics find silly.
But Harkin may have had the last laugh.
In 1991, he inserted a provision into the NIH appropriations bill requiring the institutes to create an Office of Alternative Medicine, with a $2 million budget.
``They fought it and fought it and fought it,'' Harkin said in a recent interview.
``You'd think I was single-handedly destroying NIH by spending $2 million on alternative therapies''.
The amount was indeed a drop in the bucket for the institutes, an agency that now has a $15 billion annual budget.
The tiny office on alternative care was set up in a remote outpost, nowhere near the institutes' main campus in Bethesda, Md.
Its mission was complicated.
Alternative medicine is such a vast conglomeration of practices, ranging from the use of vitamins and herbs, to meditation, massage, movement therapy and acupuncture, that even its practitioners cannot agree on what to call it.
(The terms ``complementary,'' ``integrative'' and ``alternative'' are used interchangeably).
The office began by offering small grants of $30,000 each.
Soon, it was drawing fierce criticism for spending taxpayers' money on projects of dubious scientific merit.
``The quality was incredibly low,'' Varmus said.
``The investigators who were applying didn't really know much about science''.
In 1994, Congress took a step that would have a major effect on patients' access to alternative therapies.
It passed a law that permits manufacturers to make claims about health benefits for herbal medicines whose safety and effectiveness had not been proved by the usual standards applied to prescription drugs.
Now, said Cassileth, of Memorial Sloan-Kettering, ``Everybody can play doctor and buy anything they want over the counter and treat themselves''.
Good research became even more necessary, she said.
But the battles at NIH continued.
The alternative medicine office ran through a string of directors.
The man who took the job in 1995, Dr.
Wayne B.
Jonas, drew criticism because he practiced homeopathy, a 200-year-old system of medicine in which illnesses are often treated with diluted solutions of plant extracts.
Most mainstream scientists, including Varmus, take a dim view of homeopathy.
As a result, said Jonas, who left the institutes at the end of 1998, he had a difficult time getting approval of proposals to finance research.
But as Congress continued to appropriate more money for the office and public interest grew, Varmus said, ``I came to feel that there was a real public health concern that NIH had a responsibility to address''.
By 1996, the alternative medicine office had moved onto the main institutes' campus, and Varmus had formed an advisory group of government scientists to set priorities.
The alternative medicine literature contains thousands of studies, but the majority are scientifically flawed.
Varmus wants scientists to test the most promising and most widely used therapies.
But the critics remain.
Herbert, the Mount Sinai professor, calls the institutes' center on alternative medicine ``a worthless waste of money'' that was ``set up to promote fraud''.
Dr. Marcia Angell, editor of The New England Journal of Medicine, said the center had so far failed to publish any significant articles in scientific journals.
``The proof is in the pudding,'' Dr.
Angell said.
``Just show me the papers''.
That may take some time.
It will be three to four years, Straus predicts, before the current crop of clinical trials is complete.
Still, in a recent interview, Straus came armed with two loose-leaf notebooks full of articles that had grown from NIH-financed research, some published in the respected Journal of the American Medical Association.
He acknowledged that the center ``still has to prove itself''.
But, he said, ``I predict it will''.
For the American health care system, the implications of the new research will be vast, medically and economically.
Health maintenance organizations are just beginning to cover some alternative therapies; Oxford Health Plans, for instance, offers coverage for acupuncture.
If therapies being tested prove effective, patients will undoubtedly begin demanding coverage.
The new research could be a boon to manufacturers of herbs.
Several manufacturers of dietary supplements are beginning studies of products like ginkgo and St.
John's wort that could lead to their approval by the Food and Drug Administration, in the same way the agency approves prescription drugs, said Michael McGuffin, president of the American Herbal Products Association, a trade group.
The University of Pittsburgh, meanwhile, is joining Chinese scientists to develop herbal medicines as drugs.
In addition, Dr.
Steven DeKosky, who directs the university's Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, has also received a $3 million NIH grant to see if the ginkgo herb can prevent dementia.
Two thousand elderly patients will be enrolled.
If it works, he said, the next step will be to isolate the active ingredients and figure out how they work.
Some researchers, including Eisenberg of Harvard, say alternative therapies will not be truly accepted as mainstream until scientists can prove not just that they work, but how.
But already, medical practice is opening up, said Dr.
Marc C.
Hochberg, the rheumatology professor at the University of Maryland, who is an investigator in the acupuncture study.
This year, acupuncture was mentioned for the first time in the American College of Rheumatology's guidelines for medical management of osteoarthritis of the knee.
``Our work has opened people's eyes,'' he said.
``This used to be in the same ball park as copper bracelets.
I think we have taken acupuncture for osteoarthritis out of that realm''.
Still, Hochberg said, an important question remains: does the acupuncture really work, or is it just the placebo effect?
Hochberg hopes to have an answer by 2002.
As for Katcoff, he is sold.
He said he had been reading up on Chinese medicine, and had learned that even people who did not believe in it could benefit.
``I think I'm getting the real goods,'' he said recently, moments after a treatment.
``I've been going twice a week, and this is my fifth week, and I can honestly say that the pains in the back of my legs are gone.''
NEW YORK (AP) --Monsanto's highly successful painkiller Celebrex has been linked to 10 deaths and 11 cases of gastrointestinal hemorrhages in its first three months on the market, The Wall Street Journal reported today.
Half of the 10 people who died suffered from gastrointestinal bleeding or ulcers, according to ``adverse incident'' reports submitted to the Food and Drug Administration that were obtained by the Journal under the Freedom of Information Act.
Two other deaths were attributed to heart attacks, one to drug interaction and one to kidney disorder.
No cause of death was given for the 10th fatality.
A Monsanto spokeswoman said Tuesday that there is no evidence that Celebrex actually caused the deaths or other health problems in people taking the drug.
More than 2 million consumers have taken Celebrex.
``You can't draw any conclusions from the adverse incident reports,'' said spokeswoman Scarlett Lee Foster.
The Journal did not specify the sources of the adverse event reports, which could come from health professionals, consumers or the drug company itself.
Celebrex, manufactured by St.
Louis-based Monsanto Co.'s G.D.
Searle &AMP; Co.
subsidiary, went on the market in January to treat osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis.
Celebrex was touted by Monsanto as an effective pain reliever much like ibuprofen, but was much less likely to cause severe stomach problems such as bleeding ulcers.
So far it has been a gigantic success: 2.5 million prescriptions have been filled in its first 13 weeks on the market, compared with the record 2.7 million prescriptions of anti-impotency drug Viagra filled during its first three months.
Robert DeLap, director of an FDA office of drug evaluation, told the Journal that more research needs to be done before coming to a conclusion about Celebrex's safety.
``Do we think there's a signal that the product poses some special risk?
No, not at the moment''.
Searle officials told the Journal they remain excited about Celebrex's performance.
``We really feel the drug is performing as expected.
The safety profile is what we would expect,'' said Steve Geis, the company's vice president for arthritis clinical research.
Geis declined to go into details about any cases of death linked to the drug, but said that many patients taking Celebrex have other illnesses and are taking multiple medications.
CHICAGO (AP) --Two popular nutritional supplements won't cure arthritis but might improve its symptoms with fewer side effects than traditional treatments, an analysis of 15 studies concludes.
But much of the research on glucosamine and chondroitin compounds is flawed and probably overstates their benefits so more study is needed to determine if they really help achy joints, according to the analysis in Wednesday's Journal of the American Medical Association.
The supplements are marketed as treatments for osteoarthritis, the degenerative joint disease that afflicts about 21 million people nationwide.
They are sold over the counter in health food stores and became popular after being recommended in a 1997 book, ''The Arthritis Cure''.
''Overall, it seems probable that these compounds do have some efficacy in treating osteoarthritis symptoms and that they are safe,'' the authors wrote.
Dr. Timothy McAlindon, a Boston University rheumatologist and lead author of the analysis, said his conclusions are ''a little more positive'' than the ''profound skepticism which has existed''.
''I'm not actively recommending'' chondroitin and glucosamine, ''but I certainly don't discourage people from trying them provided they're cognizant of the available data,'' McAlindon said.
Both supplements are synthetic versions of body substances that help build cartilage, the tough tissue that lines the joints.
Laboratory studies have suggested they might promote cartilage growth, though whether they do in humans remains to be seen, McAlindon said.
The studies he analyzed compared the supplements with a placebo's effects on pain and mobility rather than measuring any changes in joints.
The authors evaluated six studies on glucosamine and nine on chondroitin published between 1966 and 1999.
All involved patients with arthritis in the hip or knee.
Overall, the studies showed moderate to large benefits from the supplements.
Chondroitin seemed to be the most effective.
But studies showing the biggest benefits were also the most flawed, McAlindon said.
Many failed to detail how the authors hid the identity of substances given to subjects --a crucial element in placebo-controlled studies.
''We also found evidence of publication bias,'' McAlindon said, referring to selective publication of the most positive results.
Most, if not all, of the studies were sponsored in some way by the supplements' makers.
While some of the most common conventional arthritis treatments --aspirin, acetaminophen and ibuprofen -- can cause gastrointestinal bleeding or liver damage, none of the studies showed significant side effects.
The analysis is ''an important contribution'' because the authors deciphered hard-to-interpret studies and provide a useful assessment of the latest research, said Dr.
John Klippel, medical director of the Arthritis Foundation.
The analysis was funded by the National Institutes of Health.
----- On the Net: National Library of Medicine site on arthritis: http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/arthritis.html Arthritis Foundation site: http://www.arthritis.org Mayo Clinic site on nontraditional treatment: http://www.mayohealth.org/mayo/0002/htm/nontraditional.htm
DAYTON, Ohio _ Even as new medications are relieving arthritis symptoms without upsetting stomachs, an Arthritis Foundation survey shows that misconceptions by both doctors and patients are holding people back from treatment that might help.
The American Physical Therapy Association hopes to educate at least the patients this weekend when it operates a toll-free hot line.
``There are tips that physical therapists can offer to help people with arthritis to avoid fatigue and flare-ups and to make their homes more arthritis-friendly,'' said APTA president Jan K.
Richardson. Many primary-care physicians are unaware of aggressive treatment strategies that go beyond medications, the Arthritis Foundation found, despite research showing the value of support groups, exercise classes and other complementary therapies.
The foundation's own Arthritis Self-Help Course has been shown to reduce pain by 20 percent and doctor visits by 40 percent.
Arthritis is the No.
1 cause of disability in this country, the foundation claims, costing the economy $65 billion a year and striking 40 million Americans, including 300,000 children.
But the foundation's report card still found considerable belief in the myths that arthritis only affects the elderly and that little can be done to relieve it.
Two out of five Americans with chronic joint symptoms haven't sought a doctor's diagnosis, according to research by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
And even among those diagnosed with arthritis, nearly three out of five are not undergoing treatment for it.
One reason is many people's stomachs can't handle the longtime drug of choice for arthritis, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as aspirin, ibuprofen and naproxen.
But two recently approved drugs called cox-2 inhibitors have shown success in relieving arthritis pain without upsetting the stomach.
Celecoxib, marketed as Celebrex, was the first on the market, with MK-0966 (Vioxx) receiving approval May 21.
Two new injectable drugs, hyaluronan (Hyalgan) and hylan G-F20 (Synvisk), also are effective for osteoarthritis of the knee.
By inhibiting only cox-2 enzymes, the new drugs relieve pain in the joints without leaving the stomach lining vulnerable to ulcers and bleeding, explains the Mayo Clinic's Mayo Health Oasis Web site (www.mayohealth.org).
The nutritional supplement glocusamine sulfate has been associated with reduced pain and increased mobility for arthritis patients, Mayo says, but it also warns that it hasn't been subjected to long-term safety studies and that dietary supplements aren't federally regulated to contain what they say they do.
Little controlled research has been done on chondroitin sulfate, another popular arthritis treatment.
Fraudulent arthritis products are at the top of the list of top health frauds published by the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration.
``Copper bracelets, Chinese herbal remedies, large doses of vitamins, snake or bee venom just don't work,'' the FDA explains.
``Because the symptoms of arthritis go into remission periodically, individuals who try these unproven remedies may associate the remedy with the remission''.
_ THE WEB SITE for the Arthritis Foundation is www.arthritis.org, phone number: (800) 283-7800.
The Web site for APTA is www.apta.org.
Kevin Lamb writes for the Dayton Daily News, Dayton, Ohio.
E-mail: kevinlamb(AT)coxohio.com Story Filed By Cox Newspapers For Use By Clients of the New York Times News Service
NEW YORK (AP)--Merck &AMP; Co.
made a $5.2 billion profit last year on nearly $27 billion in sales.
But the future of the nation's largest drugmaker is uncertain as four of its blockbuster drugs lose patent protection in the next two years, which make them susceptible to competition from cheaper generics.
That's why analysts say Merck desperately needs strong sales from its new pain pill Vioxx, which was approved Friday by the Food and Drug Administration and is expected to reach pharmacies in mid-June.
Vioxx, though, will have to compete with another new painkiller, Celebrex, which has been the hottest selling drug of the year.
Doctors have written 4.4 million prescriptions for Celebrex, jointly marketed by Monsanto and Pfizer, since it was launched in early January.
Celebrex this spring became the second fastest selling new drug ever, after the anti-impotence pill Viagra.
Vioxx and Celebrex are in a new class of drugs known as COX-2 inhibitors.
They offer the same pain relief as traditional arthritis drugs but cause fewer side effects, especially ulcers and intestinal bleeding.
Although Merck and Monsanto have touted tests showing fewer side effects on their drugs, the FDA has ordered both to place standard warnings about the potential for stomach problems on their labels.
Merck won a slight marketing edge Friday as the FDA approved Vioxx for menstrual pain, acute pain in adults and osteoarthritis.
Celebrex is also approved for osteoarthritis, which is the wear and tear of joints usually linked with aging, as well as for rheumatoid arthritis, in which the body's immune system backfires to cause pain and inflammation.
Once the FDA approves a drug for one disease, doctors can prescribe it for other ailments.
As a result, analysts say it is likely doctors will use Vioxx and Celebrex interchangeably.
The battle between the drugs will take place in physician offices as thousands of pharmaceutical sales representatives prod doctors to give out free samples.
Heavy consumer advertising should also start later this year.
Both drugs also will battle to gain acceptance from managed care companies, which increasingly restrict pharmaceutical coverage.
Celebrex is covered by about half of all health maintenance organizations.
Analysts expect both drugs to each eventually surpass $2 billion in annual sales by 2002.
For Merck, $2 billion will merely replace sales lost from the hypertension drug Vasotec and ulcer drug Pepsid, both of which lose U.S. patent protection next year.
Merck's cholesterol drug Mevacor and hypertension drug Prinivil lose patent protection in 2001.
Another factor putting pressure on Merck is that sales growth has slowed for its top-selling drug, the cholesterol pill Zocor.
Merck officials play down their reliance on Vioxx.
``We have a lot of products,'' said Wendy Dixon, Merck's vice president of marketing.
``Vioxx is clearly important to us, but we are by no means dependent on the success of Vioxx''.
Many analysts see it differently.
Merck is ``extremely dependent'' on Vioxx's success, said Neil Sweig, an analyst with Southeast Research Partners.
Merck hopes to persuade doctors to prescribe Vioxx, by showing results of a yearlong study compared to just three months of data for Celebrex.
Additionally, Merck's label will highlight that just 4 out of 3,300 patients studied on Vioxx suffered serious gastrointestinal problems.
``We think Merck will be able to do some damage with those numbers,'' said Alex Zisson, an analyst with Hambrecht &AMP; Quist.
The safety of the drugs will only become clear in the months ahead as the drugs are used by hundreds of thousands of patients compared to the few thousand patients which took part in the drugs' testing.
Merck officials also hope to convince doctors and patients that Vioxx is a true once a day pill.
They note that a significant number of Celebrex users must take the pill twice a day.
Monsanto said most osteoarthritis patients take Celebrex once a day.
The average wholesale price for Vioxx and Celebrex is $2.02 for the standard dosage.
Both drugs are expected to take market share away from cheaper arthritis medicines called non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, or NSAIDs, and ibuprofen.
Pain sufferers may be getting some new drug options that appear to bring relief with fewer side effects than most other treatments.
One drug, called gabapentin, is already on the market as a treatment for epileptic seizures.
Two new studies, appearing Wednesday in the Journal of the American Medical Association, show the drug is an effective painkiller in hard-to-treat cases of nerve damage from diabetes or shingles.
Separately, a panel of experts advising the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration endorsed the first in a potential new line of pain relievers, known as Cox 2 inhibitor drugs.
The new medications are designed to reduce inflammatory pain from arthritis, without the stomach distress and other gastrointestinal side effects of widely used painkillers.
The Cox 2 inhibitors are being widely touted as potential blockbusters, likely to generate at least $1 billion a year in sales during their first year on the market.
Estimates for worldwide sales of all analgesics run as high as $12 billion a year.
But many experts doubt the new drugs will live up to their early billing as ``superaspirins''.
The evidence does suggest they cause fewer side effects than ibuprofen and aspirin, even with daily use for many years.
But the Cox 2 inhibitors don't seem to control pain much better than current treatments.
The FDA-sponsored advisory panel voted to recommend approval of Celebrex, G.D.
Searle &AMP; Co.'s Cox 2 inhibitor, for both osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis.
The vote paves the way for full FDA approval sometime next year.
Meanwhile, Merck &AMP; Co.
has its own Cox 2 inhibitor awaiting approval, and other drugmakers are said to be close behind.
Patients with pain from nerve damage will not need to wait to try gabapentin _ it's now sold as an anti-convulsant under the brand name Neurontin by Parke-Davis, a unit of Warner-Lambert Co.
Because the drug is already on the market, doctors are free to start prescribing it immediately for pain patients.
Many already have been using it as a pain remedy, in fact, although they have had little besides rumor and first-hand experience to suggest that it works.
The new studies were carried out by independent teams of clinical researchers across the country, including doctors at the University of California at San Francisco.
Results showed that the drug works at least as well and probably better than other treatments for neuropathic pain, but with far fewer side effects.
Although the tests were conducted only in diabetes and post-herpetic neuralgia, or shingles, experts said it might also help alleviate nerve pain suffered by people with cancer and AIDS.
``It's a very important advance in pain management,'' said Dr.
Edgar Ross, director of the pain management center at Brigham and Women's Medical Center in Boston, who participated in one of the two studies.
``This is the first time we have a drug reasonably well-tolerated by most people and effective for a problem that has been resistant to most treatments''.
A Warner-Lambert spokeswoman said the company is evaluating the new evidence, and may seek FDA permission to start promoting Neurontin as a pain remedy.
But no decision has been made, she said.
Veterinarians have prescribed it for years for high-priced polo ponies and creaky old dogs.
More recently, it's been hyped as a ``cure'' for human arthritis.
But a dietary supplement called glucosamine had been dismissed as quackery by many mainstream doctors.
Until now.
Earlier this month a respectable long-term European study on glucosamine won a prominent place on the program of the American College of Rheumatology meetings in Boston.
And on September 30, the National Institutes of Health announced it will launch a $6.6 million study of glucosamine and a similar supplement called chondroitin, one of the most expensive clinical trials ever conducted of any ``alternative'' therapy.
But glucosamine and chondroitin are not the only hot new areas in arthritis.
Researchers are paying respectful attention to acupuncture, tai chi, stinging nettle (it may cut down on the need for conventional painkillers), and other complementary therapies.
They're also excited about new science-based approaches such as cox-2 inhibitors (already on the market) and metalloprotease inhibitors (still experimental).
Arthritis researchers say they're finally beginning to understand how to attack the most common form of the disabling disease, called osteoarthritis _ the deterioration of the cartilage that cushions each joint, generally causing symptoms after age 45.
Currently, 23 million Americans suffer from osteoarthritis _ one in every eight adults.
(Another 2.1 million have rheumatoid arthritis, an autoimmune disease that strikes younger adults, usually women).
As the baby boomers enter the osteoarthritis-prone years, the number of sufferers will swell.
Nothing except heart disease causes more disability, and no disease robs more people of their ability to walk, climb stairs, and even do something as simple as rise from a sitting position.
Fortunately, ``there's a lot of progress in osteoarthritis,'' says rheumatologist David T.
Felson of Boston University School of Medicine.
``The emerging paradigm is that this is a disease that needs to be treated with multiple approaches''.
That includes alternative treatments.
Even before the NIH study is off the drawing boards, leading US arthritis specialists are recommending glucosamine to their patients _ not as a cure, but as something that reduces pain in some people and may (or may not) retard the progress of the disease, depending on whether the European study results can be confirmed.
``Try it for 30 days,'' Boston University rheumatologist David T.
Felson told 62-year-old Maureen Palmer last week at Boston Veterans Affairs Medical Center, where she is participating in a BU study of osteoarthritis.
``I'm putting all my patients on this stuff.
It's completely safe, and it's worth trying''.
Palmer, a fifth-grade schoolteacher with a painful right knee, says her primary care doctor was skeptical of glucosamine when she asked about it.
``Now I think I'll give it a try,'' she said.
Specialists' open-mindedness about alternative therapies is underscored by a new 286-page ``Guide to Alternative Therapies'' published by the Arthritis Foundation, a nonprofit research and service organization.
The guide sorts through the scientific evidence (or lack thereof) on 80 arthritis nostrums and ``healing systems,'' from Ayurveda and qi gong to copper bracelets and Thunder God Vine.
The Arthritis Foundation undertook the project because it was getting 5,000 telephone queries a month about alternative therapies.
``We had no position except `we don't know,' '' says Dr.
William J.
Arnold, who chaired the foundation's task force on alternative medicine.
To be sure, not all arthritis specialists are receptive to alternative therapies.
``To some extent the Arthritis Foundation has given credibility to a lot of things that don't deserve it,'' complains Dr.
Donald M.
Marcus, a Houston rheumatologist.
Despite lingering skepticism among their colleagues, many arthritis specialists see their field as an emerging model for the marriage of scientific and complementary approaches.
On the scientific side, leading researchers paint an expansive picture of the future of osteoarthritis treatment.
``We're going to be able to treat the pain better with safer agents.
In the next decade, if not sooner, we'll be able to give you things that will slow the disease,'' says Dr.
Roland D.
Moskowitz of Case Western Reserve University of Cleveland.
``And we're going to able to resurface joints with biological materials, not only to treat the disease but to repair the damage''.
Some new approaches come from surprising directions.
For instance, there's some evidence that a common antibiotic may slow joint damage or even prevent osteoarthritis.
Dr. Kenneth D.
Brandt of the University of Indiana is overseeing a large federally sponsored trial of doxycycline, a synthetic version of the antibiotic tetracycline, in people with osteoarthritis or at high risk for the disease.
Tetracyclines inhibit enzymes that soften and break down cartilage.
Until recently, researchers thought that osteoarthritis was simply a matter of wear and tear, a grinding down of the slick, elastic cartilage that cushions and lubricates the ends of all bones.
Mechanical forces certainly play a role, especially in initiating the damage.
Earlier injury, whether from athletics or repetitive overuse in the workplace, increases the risk for later arthritis by three- to six-fold.
Maureen Palmer's knee arthritis is the price she's paying for a ski injury nearly 30 years ago.
With each step, weight-bearing joints must bear a force equivalent to up to six times total body weight.
Thus, it makes sense that there's a strong link between osteoarthritis and excess weight.
Overweight individuals have four to five times the risk of osteoarthritis.
But mechanical forces do not totally explain osteoarthritis.
Overweight individuals have a higher risk of arthritis in the hands too, suggesting that obesity exerts a systemic effect.
Inheritance plays a role too, especially in arthritis of the hand.
So do hormones, since women's risk of the disease rises sharply after menopause, when estrogen levels decrease sharply.
Diet also affects osteoarthritis, especially once the process has begun.
Researchers think this may be due in part to the effects on cartilage from oxidation _ a central mechanism of age-related tissue damage.
In a study of participants in the well-known Framingham Heart Study, Felson's group found those with the highest dietary intake of vitamin C, an antioxidant, had one-third the risk of developing knee pain from arthritis compared to individuals with the lowest vitamin C levels.
Vitamin C may also facilitate cartilage repair.
Vitamin E, another antioxidant, apparently has less effect on the progression of arthritis, but its anti-inflammatory effects may explain why some studies suggest vitamin E supplements may ease pain in some patients.
For now, the best advice specialists can offer to osteoarthritis sufferers is to attack the disease with a combination of lifestyle, medical, and dietary interventions _ and ultimately, joint replacement surgery when all else fails.
At the top of the list are weight loss and exercise.
``Even a little weight loss can make a difference,'' says Brandt, the Indiana arthritis specialist.
Framingham data show that a weight loss of 11 pounds in women of medium height reduced the risk of painful knee arthritis by half.
Exercise _ especially gentle and progressive resistance exercise that strengthens leg muscles _ is getting increased attention among arthritis researchers.
This doesn't mean going to a gym and working out like Schwarzenegger; cheap ankle weights or elastic bands, used faithfully at home to do leg-lifting exercises, will do the trick.
``It takes very little physical activity to improve fitness,'' says Brandt.
``Even the very elderly can do it''.
One reason is that stronger leg muscles brace the knee and hip joints, reducing the wobble that comes with age-related loosening of ligaments.
Increased joint stability in turn protects cartilage from the cycle of injury, enzymatic breakdown, and inflammation.
A Tufts University study presented at the Boston rheumatology meeting showed a home exercise regimen improved leg strength by 71 percent and reduced arthritic knee pain by 36 percent.
A larger exercise study from England showed similar improvements in knee pain and physical function.
When painkillers are necessary, doctors often advise the old standby acetaminophen (Tylenol or generic brands) if inflammation is not an issue, although users should be cautious about combining this drug with alcohol to avoid liver damage.
To relieve both pain and inflammation, the standard recommendation has been non-steroidal anti-inflammatories (NSAIDs), but chronic use of NSAIDs such as ibuprofen and naproxen can erode the stomach lining and cause potentially dangerous bleeding.
The new cox-2 inhibitors celecoxib (Celebrex) and rofecoxib (Vioxx) appear to avoid this problem entirely while maintaining equal efficacy against osteoarthritis pain and inflammation, according to two studies published last week in the Journal of the American Medical Association.
It's no accident that Celebrex has vaulted into first place among prescription painkillers.
But Celebrex and Vioxx cost from $90 to $120 a month, which can be prohibitive for many people, especially if they have little or no prescription drug coverage.
Eventually, Moskowitz thinks, ``more cox-2 inhibitors will come out and the price will come down''.
Whatever improvements emerge in medical therapy _ conventional or alternative _ many osteoarthritis patients will eventually run out of stop-gap options.
For them, the ultimate treatment is an artificial knee or hip.
``Total knee and hip replacement have totally revolutionized arthritis treatment, in terms of keeping people walking and off crutches,'' Moskowitz says.
``When patients say, `Doc, this is really interfering with my lifestyle and the medicines aren't helping anymore,' it's appropriate to take the risk''.
Thomas Ercoline, 64, is glad he did.
After conventional medicine and acupuncture no longer relieved the excruciating pain caused by his knee arthritis, the Peterborough, N.H. man had joint replacement surgery in July.
``Initially the pain was worse than the arthritis.
The first two weeks after the operation you wonder why you had it done,'' Ercoline said.
``But when I found I could walk up and down stairs again, and walk with a normal gait, it sure was worth it''.
&QL; (Richard A.
Knox is a member of the Globe staff.
His e-mail address is rknox(at)globe.com)
NEW YORK (AP) _ The pharmaceutical industry is announcing big gains in the fight against arthritis this week, with several companies reporting they can now reduce pain and slow progression of the often debilitating illness.
The federal government has approved two new drugs to treat rheumatoid arthritis since September, drugs that aim to help those with moderate-to-severe forms of the disease.
But industry observers say the biggest advances will occur next year with the expected approval of arthritis drugs made by Searle Inc.
and Merck and Co.
These drugs will treat the pain and inflammation associated with arthritis without the stomach problems associated with today's over-the-counter and prescription drugs, the companies say.
These drugs, called Cox-2 inhibitors, are likely to be marketed to people with rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis _ or nearly 40 million Americans.
The arthritis drugs, those in testing and those on the market, are being showcased this week at the American College of Rheumatology meeting in San Diego, where each company is trying to show arthritis doctors why its treatment works best.
``This is a tremendous time,'' said Dr.
Brian Butcher, an official with the Arthritis Foundation.
``We have gone from where we could not offer much hope to people to where we can diagnose, provide early treatment and stop the progression of the disease''.
Rheumatoid arthritis afflicts 2.1 million Americans.
It occurs when patients' immune systems go awry and attack their joints, causing inflammation and stiffness as rogue immune cells eat away cartilage.
Osteoarthritis affects more than 37 million Americans, and is usually associated with the aging process.
In the past year, doctors wrote 76.7 million prescriptions for anti-arthritis drugs, according to IMS Health, a research group.
With a number of new drugs coming on the market, analysts expect sales to increase from dlrs 1.9 billion to dlrs 3 billion by 2001.
Among its many players, the pain wars pit Merck, the largest drug company worldwide in terms of sale, against the fastest growing company, Pfizer.
Pfizer will market Celebra, the Cox-2 inhibitor made by Searle, a division of Monsanto.
The federal Food and Drug Administration's advisory committee has scheduled a hearing on Celebra for Dec.
1. Merck hopes to file for FDA approval for its Vioxx drug later this year.
Company officials say they are not concerned about lagging behind Celebra for federal approval.
One reason is because Vioxx is designed as a once-a-day pill, while Celebra will have to be taken several times daily.
Dr. Bennett Shapiro, an executive vice president with Merck, attributed the surge of interest in arthritis to scientific discoveries in 1991 that showed that two different enzymes cause the body to make hormones that bring pain and inflammation and also protect the stomach lining.
As a result, drugs could be developed that stopped the pain, but left the stomach alone.
Immunex Corp.
, which won federal approval last week for its Enbrel arthritis drug, is working with American Home Products Corp.
to market it.
Enbrel is given via injection twice a week and studies show it reduces pain and duration of morning stiffness and improves swollen and tender joints.
Enbrel used the meeting in San Diego to show that the drug is also effective in children.
Centocor Inc.
used the meeting to show its experimental drug Remicade also provides relief from rheumatoid arthritis.
Remicade is already approved to treat Crohn's disease, an intestinal disorder.
The company hopes to win approval to treat arthritis with the drug next year.
Enbrel and Remicade will compete with Arava, the arthritis drug approved by the FDA in September.
Arava, made by Hoechst Marion Roussell, bills itself as the only approved drug that helps stop the progression of rheumatoid arthritis.
This isn't the way medical science is supposed to work.
A remedy used to treat creaky bones in horses and dogs works so well that humans start taking it.
It gets hyped in a best-selling book on arthritis and the number of users skyrockets.
Doctors get glowing testimonials from patients, so they tell other patients to try it.
Finally, with about 5 million Americans taking the concoction of crab shells and cow cartilage, enough begin asking how it works _ and enough doctors wonder whether it really does _ that scientists finally begin studying its safety and effectiveness.
That's what happened with glucosamine and chondroitin, which taken together or separately are now America's top-selling joint supplements.
The early results of research, including one study just published and another due out soon, suggest the treatment actually does ease joint pain and may even forestall further cartilage damage.
The promising research is bound to make the hard-to-pronounce potions, which are available over the counter, even more wildly popular.
``This is a strange, inverted application of the traditional scientific model,'' said Dr.
Timothy McAlindon, an associate professor of medicine at Boston University who has analyzed the evidence on glucosamine and chondroitin sulfate, here and abroad.
``The science isn't black or white.
We're building a case trying to figure out if this works or not, and at the moment the evidence is favoring these products''.
Dr. Roland Moskowitz, a professor at Case Western Reserve University who next week will help initiate the biggest study ever of glucosamine and chondroitin for the National Institutes of Health, also is bemused by the treatment's unconventional history.
But he said ``enough people are using it that if it works, we ought to know about it.
And if it doesn't, we should know it doesn't and stop people from spending money on it.
``If it works, we'll have lucked out''.
Luck has little to do with it if you ask the hordes of horsemen and pet owners across America who have been giving their animals the glucosamine-chondroitin pill since the early 1990s and swear that it quickens the animals' gait and eases their agony.
Ditto for millions of people in Europe who for even longer have been using the two compounds, which occur naturally in human cartilage and are synthesized in the treatment capsules.
The Europeans even have scientific studies, more than three dozen of them, saying the medicine works.
American researchers have been slower to show an interest, which is largely a function of the way things work here with herbal therapies, dietary supplements and other nonpharmaceutical products.
Given the medicine's natural derivation, drug companies find it difficult to take out patents on the products, so they have no incentive to sponsor the expensive research to ensure they are effective or safe.
The Food and Drug Administration also steers clear of such remedies.
In the last couple of years, however, American researchers have become curious.
It was partly because of the publication in 1997 of a popular book called ``The Arthritis Cure,'' and the way it triggered an avalanche of interest in glucosamine-chondroitin among America's 20 million sufferers of the degenerative joint disease called osteoarthritis.
Many were frustrated with the side effects of other medicines and were thrilled with results they got with the new treatment.
Doctors were not about to object since their patients were so convinced and the treatment seemed safe, although over time they started pressing for more concrete evidence.
McAlindon, the BU arthritis specialist, set out to see whether all the European studies held up.
His conclusion, outlined in an article earlier this year in the Journal of the American Medical Association, was that the overseas clinical trials do show that glucosamine and chondroitin reduce pain in osteoarthritis sufferers and are safe.
But nearly all the European trials were supported by manufacturers of the supplements who had the most to gain from positive publicity.
And ``in general they were not that well done,'' McAlindon said last week.
``They seem to exaggerate the treatments' efficacy''.
A series of US studies is trying to weed out those quality problems and come up with definitive answers.
The largest of its kind, published this month in the journal Osteoarthritis and Cartilage, looked at how glucosamine-chondroitin affected pain and movement in 93 patients with arthritic knees.
``The treatment was significantly more effective than a placebo for pain and function,'' said Dr.
Amal Das, a joint replacement surgeon in Hendersonville, N.C., and the lead author.
That finding is consistent with reports from private physicians nationwide and with the results of other, smaller studies, including one published last year involving 34 Navy personnel suffering from knee or lower back pain.
While the effects on back pain were unclear, that study found, the aching in knees clearly was relieved.
The next question everyone is asking is whether the treatment does more than mask the pain.
Does it actually cure the underlying disease of osteoarthritis?
And can it help the thousands of young athletes with cartilage damage?
Logic suggests it might.
Glucosamine in its natural form stimulates cells that make cartilage, while chondroitin sulfate blocks enzymes that break down old cartilage.
The question is whether the same effects are produced by the capsules people take, which generally get glucosamine from crab, lobster, or clam shells and chondroitin from the cartilage in a cow's trachea.
And, even trickier, can the glucosamine and chondroitin in the pill work their way from the stomach to the blood to the aching knee?
Animal tests in Arizona offer hope.
Cartilage was removed from rabbits to mimic an injury of the kind humans get, and they were fed glucosamine, chondroitin, and a combination of the two.
After several months, researchers examined the injured area.
``We found the severity of the arthritis process was less in those given the treatment,'' and the combination of compounds worked best, said Dr.
Robert R.
Karpman, one of the researchers who oversaw the study in Phoenix, which is due to be published next month.
``It seems to slow the arthritic process, but it doesn't repair the joint surface''.
However, the Arizona study raises questions.
For instance: could humans tolerate the megadoses given to rabbits?
Were the beneficial effects a result of stopping further erosion of the cartilage or making new proteins to replace what was gone?
And can glucosamine and chondroitin really find their way around the stomach and liver not just to a knee or other joint, but to the particular joint that is damaged?
The fact that cartilage does not have blood vessels, and gets its only nutrition by seepage through the surrounding membrane, probably makes it easier for substances like glucosamine and chondroitin to work their way there, said Dr.
Lou Lippiello, director of laboratory research at Nutramax Laboratories, one of the leading manufacturers of the treatment and a partial sponsor of the Hendersonville and Phoenix studies.
``Apparently it doesn't affect normal joints,'' he added.
``It seems to have an affinity for joints that are undergoing some kind of trauma or stress''.
Further studies clearly are needed, which is why the NIH next week is scheduled to begin a $10 million project involving 1,500 patients.
It will look at glucosamine, chondroitin and the two together to see whether they help control arthritis pain and whether they actually attack the underlying disease.
What should patients do in the meantime?
Most orthopedic surgeons advise their patients to try it, under a doctor's guidance.
But it is expensive _ $1 or so a day for the eight weeks it takes to begin working, at which point the dosage is lowered and the cost falls to about 60 cents a day.
Insurance generally does not cover the treatment, and physicians caution children and pregnant women not to use it.
Anyone who has diabetes or is taking the blood-thinning drug heparin also should be careful.
And researchers warn that many of the low-cost concoctions being marketed today do not contain quality products.
The roar of the crowd, the crack of the bat _ and that unpleasant little squirt of tobacco juice many batters like to let loose just before they step into the box.
It just wouldn't be baseball without them.
But, hard as it may be for baseball fans to believe, chewing tobacco, or consuming nicotine in any form, may make it harder for people to perform complex tasks involving hand-eye coordination.
Tobacco-chewers proved slower at learning and adjusting to changing visual patterns on a computer screen.
They also exhibited slower, jerkier movements and were less accurate over all than non-users, reports a study in the journal Nicotine and Tobacco this month.
It is intriguing, said Jose Contreras-Vidal, the lead author of the article, that so many tobacco-chewing batters can perform a feat far beyond the ability of most other people, tobacco-using or not.
Batters routinely hit balls streaking in at more than 90 mph on any one of a number of trajectories.
He suggested the explanation may lie in the overall consistency of what batters see when they step into the box, however varied the pitches.
But he also wondered whether refraining from tobacco could still make a difference.
``Maybe they could be even better,'' said Contreras-Vidal, of the University of Maryland.
Subjects were asked to draw the straightest path from a central point on a computer screen to changing targets.
No differences were seen in a first round of tests between tobacco-chewers who had abstained for at least eight hours and non-users.
But after the test was changed, and some participants were allowed to chew tobacco, they were found to perform significantly less accurately.
Their problems continued even when they repeated the first test.
&UR; REMEDIES: Taking Vitamin E, for Better or for Worse &LR; Vitamin E supplements are among the most popular over-the-counter remedies, taken in the belief that they may help with everything from dry skin to the effects of aging.
But not all vitamin E is created equal.
A new study raises questions about how useful the vitamin can be in helping people with crippling arthritis of the knee and also offers evidence that some forms of it may actually worsen osteoarthritis.
In a study presented last week to a meeting in Boston of the American College of Rheumatology, researchers focused on a component of vitamin E called gamma tocopherol, which is increasingly being found in preparations of vitamin E, along with alpha tocopherol, the most common ingredient.
Dr. Joanne Jordan, an arthritis specialist at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, who presented the findings, said much more study is needed.
But she added, ``Based on the results of our study, we would suggest that you take the alpha tocopherol and stay away from the gamma tocopherol''.
Earlier research had suggested that a higher amount of vitamin E in the diet might help slow the progression of arthritis in the knee.
But that study did not include blacks, Dr.
Jordan said, and it gauged vitamin E intake by asking people what they ate rather than by drawing blood samples.
The new study of 400 people was evenly divided between blacks and whites with arthritis.
Researchers studied X-rays of the subjects' knees and tried to correlate the degree of their disease with the components of vitamin E in the blood.
&UR; AT RISK: Stress of War Might Cause Heart Disease &LR; The war never seems to end for some combat veterans.
A growing body of evidence has indicated that veterans who suffer post-traumatic stress disorder are at risk for a variety of health problems, from infections to digestive disorders.
Now a new study adds weight to the theory that the veterans may be more likely candidates for coronary heart disease.
The research, in a report in the current Annals of Behavioral Medicine, suggests that the stress disorder and other kinds of severe psychological stress may actually cause heart disease.
The research was part of a series of studies done by Joseph Boscarino, a Vietnam veteran and epidemiologist.
Now in private industry, Boscarino did the studies at Catholic Health Initiatives, a health network in Louisville, Ky.
``If this is confirmed, then doctors need to consider this as a risk factor'' for heart disease, Boscarino said.
Researchers based their conclusions on data from a large-scale study done for the National Institutes of Health in 1986 and 1987.
More than 4,000 Vietnam combat veterans were examined to determine the health effects of their experiences an average of 17 years after they had fought.
Although earlier studies using information from those examinations also theorized a higher risk of heart disease for veterans with stress disorders, Boscarino said the new one was more definitive because it looked at electrocardiogram data from the veterans.
Those data showed abnormal results in 28 percent of the veterans with stress disorder, 24 percent of those with depression and 22 percent of those with anxiety.
&UR; NUTRITION: Newest Superfruit: The Pomegranate &LR; Make way for the latest entrant to the pantheon of fruits and vegetables that may fight disease: the pomegranate.
Scientists at the Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, a major research center in Haifa, have issued two new studies suggesting that components of the fruit could be effective in fighting disease and slowing aging.
The studies found evidence that pomegranates contain high levels of chemicals that may help combat cancer and hardening of the arteries, and slow the aging process at the cellular level.
(One study was reported in the July issue of The Journal of Ethnopharmacology; the other has been accepted for publication next month, according to officials affiliated with the institute).
The researchers chose the pomegranate for study because it has a long history of use as a folk medicine in the Middle East, Iran and India.
They found that flavonoids, antioxidants that are believed to have a beneficial effect, exist in higher concentration in pomegranate wine than in wine made from grapes.
They also found high concentrations in pomegranate oil and juice.
The scientists cautioned, however, that more study needed to be done to prove that there were health benefits, and that people would have to eat the fruit regularly and over a long period of time.
For people who have AIDS, or the infection that causes it, information can be the most important weapon of all.
Now it has become easier to get.
A new Web site offers doctors and patients a wealth of information, regularly updated, about various HIV therapies that are approved or are still in the experimental stages.
The Web site should improve access to what has long been a valuable resource for fighting the disease: the HIV/AIDS Treatment Directory, published since 1985 by the American Foundation for AIDS Research.
The Web site (www.amfar.org/td/) offers users the ability to search a database of clinical studies of experimental therapies, which may be especially useful for patients who are not responding to conventional treatments.
People using the Web site can anonymously enter information about where they live and the specifics of their conditions, like their blood counts.
They will then be told which programs may be the most appropriate.
The site also contains links to published studies.
Unlike the print version of the directory, which was updated twice a year, the Internet one will be changed continually.
But the print directory will still be published and be available free to patients.
The foundation is a nonprofit group that says it has spent more than $161 million to fight AIDS, mostly by helping to finance almost 1,800 research teams. &QL;
NEW YORK (AP) --Monsanto will be first to sell a revolutionary type of arthritis medication, but its battle with Merck &AMP; Co.
in the high stakes painkiller drug wars is far from over.
Celebrex, made by Monsanto's Searle pharmaceutical unit, on Thursday became the first ``cox-2'' inhibitor to win Food and Drug Administration approval.
The drugs have been touted as possibly the next wonder pills because of their promise to be easier on patients' stomachs than existing medications.
But Monsanto was dealt a blow when the FDA declared there is no proof that Celebrex actually is safer for patients' stomachs than older painkillers.
As a result, when Celebrex hits retail outlets next month it must bear the same warning about side effects as many of its older competitors.
Merck, which is awaiting FDA approval for its Vioxx drug, another cox-2 pill, hopes to get a less stern warning label.
One reason Merck was behind Monsanto in seeking federal approval is because it was waiting for the results of some longer term studies.
The warning label could be a key driver of physician use, and whether either drug reaches the $1 billion in annual sales that some Wall Street analysts had forecast.
Merck also hopes to gain another advantage by getting approval for Vioxx to be taken only once a day for arthritis users.
The recommended dose of Celebrex is once or twice a day for osteoarthritis, and twice a day for rheumatoid arthritis.
``Merck may be able to use Monsanto's experience to get a better label,'' said Sergio Traversa, an analyst with Mehta Partners in New York.
After the FDA ruling Thursday, shares of Monsanto rose $1.19 to $47.50.
Pfizer, which will be co-marketing Celebrex, fell $1.12 to $125.
Merck shares dropped $1.31 to $147.50.
Merck spokesman John Bloomfield refused to speculate whether the company has enough research results to get a better warning label than Monsanto.
Merck is working closely with the FDA to demonstrate that Vioxx has safety advantages over existing drugs, he said.
``We are pretty darn happy,'' said Scarlett Lee Foster, a Monsanto spokeswoman.
``I think we got a label we can use...to have the drug widely accepted''.
Monsanto is continuing to study Celebrex in hopes of providing FDA with enough evidence to advertise Celebrex as a safer painkiller.
Millions of people now depend on aspirin, ibuprofen, and a host of other pills called ``non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs,'' or NSAIDs for arthritis and other pains.
NSAIDS can cause ulcers, stomach bleeding and other gastrointestinal side effects, and are blamed for causing 107,000 Americans to be hospitalized every year, and for killing 16,500.
Monsanto said it will price Celebrex comparably to other prescription strength painkillers that cost about $2.40 a day.
With the traditional safety warnings on Celebrex, Monsanto would have faced considerable difficulty convincing insurers to pay any more.
Despite the warning label issue, the government approval of Celebrex is a boost for Monsanto, which last summer had to drop plans to merge with American Home Products, maker of Robitussin cough syrup and Advil pain reliever.
The $33.6 billion marriage would have been the biggest merger ever in the pharmaceutical industry.
Monsanto, based in St.
Louis, makes the artificial sweetener Nutrasweet and is also heavily involved in genetic research for agriculture.
``This adds credibility to their pipeline,'' said Sano Shimda, president of BioScience Securities.
And the FDA approval is a boost for Pfizer, who some analysts feared would grow too dependent on its anti-impotence drug Viagra to spur sales growth.
Merck knows that being first to market with a new class of drugs is no guarantee of long-term success.
Merck held the lead in cholesterol lowering drugs with its Zocor drug, but Warner Lambert in the last two years has taken the market lead with its Lipitor pill.
BOSTON (AP) _ Suddenly hundreds of thousands, maybe even millions, of Americans with arthritis are taking a combination of obscure nutritional supplements.
Whatever made these pills the latest cure, it's certainly not the way their names roll off the tongue.
Glucosamine sulfate and chondroitin sulfate.
Hard to imagine marketing executives coming up with those tongue-twisters.
It's also not because a lot of arthritis specialists are pushing them on their patients.
Mention health store pills to most doctors, and the response is likely to fall somewhere between a blank look and a condescending smile.
The real reasons, it seems, are a cleverly titled book, a hard-to-treat disease that afflicts 16 million Americans and that most elusive and powerful of marketing forces, a good buzz on the street.
Or the golf course.
Or wherever else men and women of a certain age gather and talk about what's aching them.
Across the country, folks have seized on these over-the-counter pills as a new way to ease throbbing knees and hands, even though the opinion of the medical establishment is, to put it politely, skeptical.
Just how many of these people are truly finding relief is impossible to say, but clearly the experience has made believers of some.
Among them is Ralph Cushman, 49, a real estate lawyer in Anchorage, Alaska.
Cushman is the kind of guy who lives to hike and fish.
Those pleasures gradually grew difficult as old injuries stiffened his knees with arthritis, making walking painful.
On a hunting trip two years ago, he got 500 feet (150 meters) up a mountain and could go no farther.
``It was heartbreaking''.
he recalled.
``Suddenly, I couldn't deer hunt anymore.
All the things I lived for were slipping away''.
His doctor told him nothing could be done.
Take pain pills and live with it.
Cushman limped to a bookstore.
There he found something that, in his mind, changed his life.
``The Arthritis Cure,'' written by Dr.
Jason Theodosakis, lays out a program of exercise, diet and glucosamine and chondroitin.
The book has sold more than 1.4 million copies since it came out last year.
Cushman followed its directions.
``Within days, I realized it was making a tremendous difference,'' he said.
``Suddenly I could out-hike my boys rather than hollering for them to wait.
There was just no question this was working.
I assure you, you cannot make that kind of pain go away with a placebo''.
``Placebo'' is just one of the words that comes up when arthritis doctors get onto this subject.
They correctly point out that a belief something will work is often powerful medicine in itself.
Indeed, when researchers test possible arthritis drugs, about 30 percent feel better even when they are in the comparison group getting sugar pills.
Some doctors suspect this may at least partly explain why people find relief from glucosamine and chondroitin.
``Patients invest time and money in them and they want them to work, so they are more likely to see a positive effect than a negative one,'' said Dr.
Jonathan Kay of the Lahey Clinic in Burlington, Mass.
Osteoarthritis, by far the most common form of the disease, develops when the cartilage that covers the ends of the bones in the joints begins to break down.
Eventually, bone rubs against bone, causing pain and loss of movement.
Doctors' usual advice is exercise to strengthen the muscles around the joints and weight loss to reduce some of the stress.
Mainstream practitioners also usually recommend anti-inflammatory drugs.
Among these are aspirin, Motrin and other other-the-counter painkillers and a variety of prescription medicines.
But many patients suffer despite these pills, and steady use can have serious side effects, such as stomach ulcers and liver damage.
According to one estimate, anti-inflammatory drugs contribute to more than 7,000 deaths in the United States annually.
Furthermore, the medicines do nothing to slow the progression of arthritis.
Unlike these drugs, glucosamine (pronounced glue-COSE-uh-mean) and chondroitin (conn-DROY-tin) are already present in the body as building material of cartilage.
Proponents theorize that taking extra glucosamine stimulates new cartilage production, while chondroitin slows its destruction.
To hear them tell it, these supplements not only relieve or eliminate the pain, they can also stop and even reverse the disease.
And they do all this with no side effects.
To which many arthritis experts reply: Show us the proof.
Most studies of glucosamine and chondroitin were done several years ago in Europe.
In general, they suggest that the supplements work about as well as over-the-counter painkillers in easing the ache.
In the test tube, they appear to stimulate and preserve cartilage.
However, skeptics note these studies were small, not particularly well done and didn't combine glucosamine and chondroitin, which is the way most people now take them.
Dr. Doyt Conn, medical director of the Arthritis Foundation, said the supplements appear to be safe, and they may indeed do some good for some people, but his organization cannot recommend them until there are better scientific data.
``We have to be responsible to the public and give them what reliable information there is to make a judgment,'' Conn said.
``Right now, I don't think that information is out there''.
Several U.S. studies are under way, sponsored by companies that make the supplements.
The National Institutes of Health is also underwriting one, with results expected in about five years.
&UR; (Margaret Talbot is a contributing writer for The New York Times Magazine).
&LR; ----------------- &QC;
Dr. Bobby Wroten, the prestigious Fort Worth hand surgeon who fixed Juan Gonzalez's left thumb last year, was peering at my X-rays.
We can relieve the tingling and numbness, he said, keep your hands from falling asleep and restore some of the strength, but it's not going to get rid of all your pain.
I had arthritis.
That was five years ago, plenty of time to have recovered from successful carpal tunnel surgery on both wrists and to become much more aware of the lingering pain of arthritis.
Thumbs throbbing, fingers stiff, wrists aching, neck and shoulders burning like muscles pushed to the limits of exercise, arthritis can wake you up at night _ sometimes with tender spots that feel as if you must have been sleeping on pea gravel.
Others say arthritis feels like having shards of glass in your joints.
I take a lot of Tylenol and Aleve and have tried cortisone injections and capsaicin cream, the topical analgesic made from red pepper.
I've never hurt badly enough to deliberately submit to bee stings in the hope that the venom might relieve the pain, but some arthritis sufferers are willing to take that risk.
They spend more than $1 billion a year on unproven remedies for the pain and inflammation of more than 100 different types of arthritis, according to the Arthritis Foundation.
``We spend as much on unproven remedies for this disease as we do on research,'' says Dr.
Bernard Rubin, chief of rheumatology at the University of North Texas Health Science Center in Fort Worth.
Arthritis is prone to unproven, fraudulent and even dangerous treatments because so many people suffer from it _ 40 million Americans today, expected to hit 59.4 million by 2020 _ and because there are no effective drugs that work long term for everybody.
``People grasp at straws.
Sometimes patients feel doctors don't give their arthritis enough attention.
There must be something better out there, so they go looking for it,'' Rubin says.
Something better _ in the form of a whole new class of anti-inflammatory drugs that fight pain and joint destruction without destroying the stomach and kidneys _ made headlines this month.
Cox-2 inhibitors, being developed under the names Celebra and Vioxx, are expected to outsell even Viagra, the impotency pill that became the fastest-selling drug in history.
Cox-2 drugs are not more effective, just safer.
They are easier on the stomach and can be taken in larger doses for a longer time without damage to the stomach or kidneys.
They could be on pharmacy shelves by early 1999.
``It's one of the most exciting developments in the treatment of arthritis in 25 years because we potentially will be able to treat people for their pain and inflammation without them suffering the side effects,'' says Rubin.
Cox-2 drugs are a type of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories, such as Naproxen and Ibuprofen.
Anti-inflammatories are drugs that reduce both pain and swelling by neutralizing the enzymes that cause them.
Researchers have identified two types of this enzyme: cox-1, which releases chemicals that protect the stomach against peptic ulcers, and cox-2, which releases chemicals that cause inflammation.
The old class of drugs inhibited both enzymes.
The new class of drugs selectively works against cox-2 enzymes _ without inhibiting the cox-1 enzymes that protect the stomach.
It's a development that could be worth billions.
Arthritis sufferers spend millions to pay for unproven alternatives because it gives them a sense of mastery over their pain and because they mistakenly believe that traditional medicine has nothing to offer, says Dr.
Doyt Conn, senior vice president for medical affairs for the Arthritis Foundation.
``The problem is, the public's misconception that tends to lump all forms of arthritis into one package, and to assume that it's an inevitable part of aging and nothing can be done about it _ all misconceptions,'' Conn says.
The term ``arthritis'' includes more than 100 disorders that attack cartilage in the bone joints.
The disease causes pain, swelling and loss of movement when bone rubs against bone after the cartilage has deteriorated.
The best treatment depends on the specific diagnosis.
MORE Among the most common types of arthritis: OSTEOARTHRITIS, or degenerative joint disease.
Affects an estimated 15.8 million Americans, mostly over age 45.
It involves the breakdown of cartilage and bones through wear-and-tear injuries, and is most often found in the fingers and weight-bearing joints including the knees, feet, hips and back.
RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS.
One of the most serious and disabling types, affecting an estimated 2.1 million Americans.
It involves a genetic abnormality in the body's immune system that causes inflammation in the lining of the joints that can damage cartilage and bone.
It often leads to crippling deformities in the hands, wrists, feet, knees, ankles, shoulders, neck, jaw and elbows.
JUVENILE ARTHRITIS.
A general term for all types of arthritis that occur in children.
An estimated 300,000 children in this country have the disease; most have juvenile rheumatoid arthritis.
FIBROMYALGIA. Affects approximately 3.7 million Americans, causing pain and tenderness at points where muscles attach to bones.
People with fibromyalgia frequently experience fatigue, disturbed sleep, stiffness and sometimes psychological distress.
GOUT. A painful condition that most often attacks small joints, especially in the big toe.
It is caused by a defect in body chemistry and usually can be controlled with medication and changes in diet.
BURSITIS AND TENDINITIS.
Result from irritation caused by injuring or overusing a joint.
Bursitis affects a small sac that helps muscles move easily.
Tendinitis affects the tendons that attach muscles to bone.
It is critically important to first find out what kind of arthritis you have, according to the experts.
``Usually there are lifestyle measures that are very important,'' Conn says.
``If you have osteoarthritis of the knee and you are 20 pounds overweight, that weight is a big factor.
You need to know what exercising, what conditioning you should be doing''.
The earlier that diagnosis is made, the more hope there is for living well into old age with even the most crippling forms.
For example, only in the past few years have experts recommended very early, aggressive treatment for rheumatoid arthritis with disease-modifying drugs such as methotrexate (first developed for cancer treatment).
The National Institutes of Health reported last month that arthritis is now the leading cause of disability among Americans older than 15, as measured by federal disability payments.
The surge of aging baby boomers and the growing number of children who have the disease put arthritis ahead of heart disease, the leading cause of disability payments in a similar study in 1989.
More than $65 billion a year in Social Security disability payments goes to the 21 million arthritis sufferers who are unable to work because of their disease, according to the Arthritis Foundation.
In comparison, about $50 billion a year in disability payments goes to 17 million heart disease patients.
(Carolyn Poirot covers health issues for the Fort Worth Star-Telegram.
Visit the Star-Telegram's online services on the World Wide Web: www.star-telegram.com) &QL;
NEW YORK (AP) --Vioxx, the highly anticipated new pain pill from Merck &AMP; Co.
Inc. that promises to be easier on the stomach than aspirin, works well in relieving menstrual and post-surgical pain, according to two company studies unveiled today at a medical meeting.
Vioxx is expected to reach pharmacies later this spring after obtaining approval from the federal Food and Drug Administration.
Vioxx was as effective as prescription-strength Aleve, an aspirin-type drug, in treating moderate to severe menstrual pain, according to a Merck study of 127 women being presented at the American Society of Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics in San Antonio, Texas.
The study found pain relief was sustained for at least 12 hours.
In a second study of 151 patients who had oral surgery to remove their wisdom teeth, Vioxx proved as effective at postoperative pain relief as ibuprofen.
The dental study also showed one 50 milligram Vioxx pill could provide relief for a full 24 hours.
Ibuprofen must be taken at least three times a day.
Vioxx will likely become the second in a new class of pain medications which work as well as aspirin and other anti-inflammatory medicines but don't cause stomach irritation that can lead to ulcers and other dangerous ailments.
Merck, the world's largest drug company, will be playing catch-up to Monsanto Co.'s Celebrex drug, which won U.S. approval on Dec.
31. Celebrex, approved for osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis, has already sold more than 1.1 million prescriptions, making it the biggest new drug of 1999.
It has also has become the second-fastest-selling new drug in history after Pfizer Inc.'s impotence pill Viagra.
Like Celebrex, Merck is looking to get approval for Vioxx to treat osteoarthritis, which affects more than 16 million Americans.
But instead of also seeking indication for rheumatoid arthritis, which affects about 2 million Americans, it wants the FDA to approve Vioxx for acute pain treatment --a market of more than 40 million Americans.
It's for this reason that Merck is giving the FDA data showing how the drug works against different types of pain.
Though the risk of stomach ailments is higher when taking aspirin and other anti-inflammatory drugs for prolonged use, a dilemma faced most arthritis sufferers, the gastrointestinal risks exist even with short duration use, experts say.
Neil Sweig, an analyst with Southeast Research Partners, said getting the acute pain indication is vital for Merck, though the market for the both Celebrex and Vioxx is bigger with arthritis because patients with that condition take pain relievers more often.
An FDA advisory committee meets April 20 to review Merck's application for Vioxx.
NEW YORK _ Doctors are accustomed to offices crowded with patients, but in the last several weeks, salespeople from Merck and Monsanto have also been vying to get their attention to promote new arthritis drugs.
Monsanto is off to a fast start with Celebrex, its arthritis tablet, which has had the strongest debut ever for a drug.
The company anticipates more than 2.5 million sales calls on doctors this year, the most ever in a drug's first year, says Monsanto.
But Merck is gaining fast with Vioxx in its first couple of months on the market.
And it will soon begin a big advertising push to compete with Monsanto's.
These efforts are destined to make the pills as ubiquitous on the airwaves at least as Tylenol and Excedrin.
Can celebrity endorsers be far behind?
There is plenty riding on this battle.
Analysts expect the market for prescription arthritis drugs to swell from $7.2 billion worldwide this year to $13 billion by 2005.
And for their own reasons, Merck and Monsanto want not just a success but a blockbuster.
The scrap is beginning to get interesting.
Even though Celebrex, which is being co-marketed by Monsanto and Pfizer, controls the market, Vioxx has made steady gains since its introduction in May.
Celebrex and Vioxx are both Cox-2 inhibitors, prescribed as replacements for nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs like ibuprofen and generally regarded as easier on the stomach.
In the week ended June 11, Vioxx had 7 percent of the Cox-2 market, with Celebrex taking the rest, according to the industry consultant IMS Health.
But by July 23, Vioxx accounted for 22 percent of total prescriptions, while Celebrex had fallen to 78 percent.
``It's unlikely that Vioxx will ever catch up with Celebrex,'' said Jack Lamberton, a managing director at HSBC Securities.
``But this market is large enough for both drugs''.
The stakes are unusually large.
In an industry where earnings tend to rise 15 percent or more a quarter, Monsanto and Merck need a blockbuster drug to remain competitive with other pharmaceutical companies.
After its proposed merger with American Home Products fell apart last year, Monsanto announced a $625 million reorganization.
Even though drug makers are generally suffering and the Standard &AMP; Poor's drug index is down 14.7 percent this year, Monsanto has done worse.
Its stock has slid 17.1 percent this year, to close Monday at $39.375, up 12.5 cents.
Merck's situation does not appear as dire _ the company's stock is down only 8.6 percent this year _ but analysts say the company can ill afford a marketing disaster.
Several of Merck's drugs will lose their patent protection in the next few years, leaving the company vulnerable to eroding revenues as generic alternatives become available.
And Merck is no longer Wall Street's darling.
During the last 12 months, shares of Bristol-Myers Squibb have climbed 18.6 percent.
Meanwhile, Merck's shares have gained 10.7 percent.
They closed Monday at $67.375, down 25 cents.
Stock analysts have high expectations for both new arthritis drugs.
After Vioxx was introduced, analysts began ratcheting up their projected sales of it to an expected peak of about $2.3 billion a year sometime around 2004, up from a peak estimate of $1.5 billion just months earlier.
Celebrex's sales, meanwhile, are expected to be about $3 billion by 2004.
``Our marketing success with Vioxx will depend on the awareness of the brand,'' said Wendy Dixon, a Merck vice president.
``With a condition that involves pain, people talk to each other.
A lot of the sales from Vioxx should be generated by word of mouth''.
Willard Reese, a retired engineer from Palm Coast, Fla.
, suffered for years with arthritis pain before finding some relief three weeks ago after his doctor prescribed Vioxx.
``My doctor changed several of my medications,'' Reese said.
``But I have realized a marked improvement.
My right hand is almost normal, when it was about 60 percent functional before''.
Testimonials like his are sure to encourage arthritis sufferers to inquire about Vioxx and Celebrex.
Except in rare cases, the drug that first racks up the largest share of a new market seldom relinquishes it.
Celebrex, whose sales began in January, had the most successful debut by a drug ever in the United States, eclipsing such luminaries as Viagra, Pfizer's impotence pill, and Lipitor, Warner-Lambert's drug for reducing cholesterol, according to IMS Health.
``We're not looking over our shoulder at Vioxx,'' said Joseph Papa, president of U.S. operations for Searle, a division of Monsanto.
``We're outperforming them on every measure''.
Merck, though, has been fast off the starting block.
Known for its Marine-like marketing efficiency, Merck began shipping Vioxx to pharmacies two business days after it received approval from the Food and Drug Administration.
Merck has also distributed the most free samples in its history.
The biggest selling point for Vioxx and Celebrex is that they may be less likely to cause gastrointestinal bleeding than other arthritis remedies.
(STORY CAN END HERE _ OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS) ``Vioxx and Celebrex are safer on the gastrointestinal tract,'' said Dr.
Steven Abramson, the chairman of Rheumatology at the Hospital of Joint Diseases and the chairman of the FDA Advisory Committee that reviewed both drugs.
In comparisons between Vioxx and Celebrex, Merck would like to focus on the two drugs' labels.
Vioxx has an indication for treatment of acute pain; Celebrex does not _ it has been approved for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis.
The Merck drug is also single-dose.
Celebrex can be administered in a single or double dose.
Merck executives contend that Vioxx's single dose gives it an advantage over Celebrex since patients usually want to take as few pills as possible.
Monsanto has countered that Celebrex gives patients more options.
``About 90 percent of the people who use Celebrex for osteoarthritis take the 200-milligram pill once a day,'' Papa said.
``If someone wants the flexibility, they can take the 100-milligram pill twice a day''.
Along with doctors and consumers, health-maintenance organizations may hold part of the key to the drugs' acceptance.
Several HMOs have restricted the use of one or both of the drugs.
Kaiser Permanente, which has 8.6 million members nationwide, has limited the use of the drugs to people who are at high risk of gastrointestinal bleeding.
Even though Dr.
David Campen, who chairs Kaiser's drug formulary committee, notes that the plan will cover any drug a doctor prescribes, he does not believe the plan should cover Vioxx and Celebrex.
Campen has recently sent out questionnaires to some 50 doctors, and expects to render a decision in September.
The pills' prices might play a role.
Vioxx is priced comparably with Celebrex, which has an average wholesale price of $2.42 for its once-a-day pill.
But when patients use Celebrex twice a day, the cost swells to $2.86.
Both drugs cost considerably more than traditional generic nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, which run about $1.70 for a daily dose.
Some natural remedies can ease the pain of arthritis.
Others just ease the money out of your wallet.
Here's what you need to know to be a wise _ and safe _ consumer.
Shark cartilage.
Glucosamine. Chondroitin.
You've undoubtedly heard of them.
They're all touted to help _ if not ``cure'' _ arthritis.
But do they work?
Some do, some don't.
Americans spend an estimated $10 billion a year on unproven _ and ineffective _ arthritis remedies.
This guide will help you choose the right natural remedy to ease your pain _ and at the right price too.
Here is an overview of supplements, what they claim to do, any proof related thereto, suggested use and cost.
&UR; GLUCOSAMINE SULFATE &LR; &QL; Claim: Glucosamine, a natural substance, furnishes the building blocks that our bodies use to make and repair cartilage.
Proof: Some recent well-done research shows that glucosamine soothes knee pain as well as ibuprofen does, but without the side effects.
Suggested Dose: 1,500 milligrams (mg) a day in two or three doses.
Some Prices We Found: GNC: Thirty 600-mg capsules, $7.99.
Nature's Bounty: Thirty 500-mg capsules, $10.89 &UR; CHONDROITIN SULFATE &LR; &QL; Claim: Experts think that chondroitin, which exists naturally in cartilage, may make tissue more flexible and protect it from harmful chemicals.
Proof: Some studies show that chondroitin stops joint degeneration, improves joint function and eases pain.
But evidence is stronger for glucosamine.
Suggested Dose: 1,200 mg a day in two or three doses.
(May increase the effects of blood-thinning drugs and herbs).
Some Prices We Found: Twinlab: Thirty 750-mg capsules, $17.09.
Basic Nutrition: Thirty 400-mg capsules, $9.99.
GNC: Thirty 400-mg capsules, $18.49.
&UR; GLUCOSAMINE AND CHONDROITIN &LR; &QL; Claim: The combined effects of these supplements may help ease osteoarthritis (OA) symptoms.
Proof: A recent study showed that after eight weeks of taking both supplements (Cosamin), men with OA reported less knee pain.
Suggested Dose: 500 mg of glucosamine and 400 mg of chondroitin in three doses.
It may take up to eight weeks to see improvement.
Some Prices We Found: Cosamin DS: 180 capsules, $84.99 to $94.99.
&UR; SAM-e/ or S-ADENOSYLMETHIONINE &LR; &QL; Claim: May improve joint mobility and relieve the pain of OA by boosting levels of the amino acid ATP and supporting cartilage production.
Proof: Some studies have shown that SAM-e relieves mild OA pain almost as well as NSAIDs, but without the digestive tract side effects.
Suggested Dose: 200 to 400 mg in three doses.
Some Prices We Found: GNC: Thirty 200-mg tablets, $39.99.
Nature Made: Twenty 200-mg tablets, $21.99.
&UR; FISH OIL &LR; &QL; Claim: The omega-3 fatty acids in fish oil _ eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) _ may ease rheumatoid arthritis (RA) symptoms by providing anti-inflammatory building blocks.
Proof: Many studies have shown that fish oil helps the inflammation and accompanying pain of RA.
It may reduce the need for NSAIDs such as ibuprofen.
Suggested Dose: 3 grams (g) or 3,000 mg a day total of EPA/DHA.
Good food sources are cold-water fish such as sardines, salmon, tuna and mackerel.
Try to eat them two or three times a week.
Some Prices We Found: Nature's Way: Max EPA, 100 capsules (120 mg DHA and 180 mg EPA each), $10.39.
Twinlab: Twin EPA Extra Strength, 60 capsules (240 mg DHA and 600 mg EPA each), $27.95.
&UR; GLA (GAMMA LINOLENIC ACID) &LR; &QL; Claim: The body converts these omega-6 fatty acids into anti-inflammatory compounds.
Proof: Studies show that GLA can reduce the tenderness, morning stiffness and inflammation of RA.
It may reduce the need for NSAIDs such as ibuprofen.
Suggested Dose: 1,800 mg a day.
GLA is available in evening primrose oil (may counteract the effects of anticonvulsant drugs), borage oil and black currant seed oil.
Some Prices We Found: Twinlab: Ultra GLA 300, Thirty 300-mg softgels, $11.89.
&UR; GREEN TEA &LR; &QL; Claim: Polyphenols in green tea have been shown to reduce inflammation, a symptom of RA.
Proof: Mice given green tea extract had much lower rates of arthritis than mice not given the extract.
Human studies are needed, but green tea is safe, so it may be worth a try.
Suggested Dose: 3 to 4 cups a day (equivalent of 600 to 800 mg of polyphenols).
It's also available in decaffeinated and flavored forms and capsules.
If you buy decaffeinated tea, it must be decaffeinated using water and carbon dioxide, a process called effervescence, in order to retain the polyphenols.
If the label doesn't tell you, contact the manufacturer.
Some Prices We Found: GNC: Star GLA Omega-3 Gamma-Linolenic Acid, Sixty 200-mg softgel capsules, $29.99.
Alvita: Green Tea bulk (note: milk may interfere with the polyphenol's action, so drink green tea plain), 4.5 ounces, $3.99.
GNC: Chinese Harvest of Nature Green Tea, 24 bags, $4.99.
Natrol: Sixty 500-mg capsules, $8.29 &UR; TYPE II COLLAGEN &LR; &QL; Claim: Suppresses the autoimmune response that causes the pain, swelling, and stiffness of RA.
Proof: Some studies show that taking type II collagen orally can reduce the pain and inflammation of RA.
Suggested Dose: 500 micrograms (mcg) or less.
NSAIDs may block the absorption of type II collagen; talk to your doctor before using.
Some Prices We Found: Twinlab: Maxilife chicken collagen, 60 pills, $25.95.
&UR; OPTIONAL SIDEBAR: SAVE YOUR MONEY &LR; &QL; The pain and chronic nature of arthritis force some people to try almost anything for relief, even unproven _ or downright harmful _ remedies.
When in doubt, ask your doctor for guidance.
In the meantime, here are a few products that have not been proven to relieve arthritis _ though some have benefits for other conditions: _ Copper bracelets: There's no scientific evidence to back up copper's antiarthritis claims.
_ Shark cartilage: Although advertised to help ease osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis symptoms, there is no scientifically accepted evidence that shark cartilage works for arthritis.
_ Alfalfa: Used for years as a folk remedy for arthritis, no studies show that it's effective.
_ DMSO (dimethyl sulfoxide): A byproduct of wood processing, DMSO is said to ease pain and improve flexibility in people with arthritis.
But many versions on the market aren't suitable for humans.
They're chemically impure and potentially harmful.
_ Maybe MSM?
There is some anecdotal evidence that MSM (methyl sulfonyl methane) may help alleviate arthritis pain.
So far, no published studies have shown that it's effective for treating arthritis.
But if you haven't had success with any of the proven arthritis remedies, it's probably safe to try MSM to see if it helps you.
&UR; OPTIONAL SIDEBAR: SHOP SMART &LR; &QL; With so many arthritis supplements on the market, it's hard to know what to buy and what to avoid.
Our 10-point checklist will help.
1. Make sure that the product label lists the amount of the active ingredient it contains.
2. Choose products from large companies _ they value their reputations.
3. Buy supplements at stores you trust.
4. Avoid products using words such as ``scientific breakthrough'' or ``miracle cure''.
5. Beware of products that claim to cure all types of arthritis.
6. Remember: If a product sounds too good to be true, it probably is.
7. Always talk to your doctor before taking any supplement for arthritis.
8. Continue taking your current medication until you've gotten your doctor's OK to try something new.
9. Bear in mind that ``natural'' doesn't necessarily mean safe.
10. If you already take an arthritis supplement, mention it to your doctor.
&UR; OPTIONAL SIDEBAR: ANTIOXIDANTS FOR ARTHRITIS &LR; &QL; Need another reason to get your five-a-day?
Some studies have shown that the antioxidants found in fruits and vegetables may protect joints _ especially the knee _ from the ravages of osteoarthritis (OA).
Here are a few of the studies' findings: _ People with high intakes of vitamin C and beta-carotene had a reduced risk of knee pain and disease progression.
_ Certain antioxidants (including lutein and lycopene, among others) were associated with lower risk of knee OA.
_ Vitamin E eased arthritis pain better than a placebo or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs).
To be sure that you're getting enough beta-carotene, lutein, lycopene and vitamin C, eat lots of carrots, sweet potatoes, broccoli, spinach, tomato sauce and tomato juice, oranges, kiwifruit and strawberries.
(Prevention now recommends nine veggies a day for disease protection).
To get the amount of vitamin E that most experts advise, you'll need a vitamin E supplement containing 400 international units.
Since OA progression was three times higher in people with low levels of vitamin D, it's best to take a multivitamin/mineral supplement with 100 percent of the daily value for D.
To learn more about arthritis, contact the Arthritis Foundation at 1330 W.
Peachtree St.
, Atlanta, GA 30309.
Phone (800) 283-7800, or visit their Web site www.arthritis.org.
To read more about alternative arthritis therapies, check out ``The Arthritis Foundation's Guide to Alternative Therapies,'' by Judith Horstman (Arthritis Foundation, 1999).
Available for $24.95 plus $4.99 shipping and handling at (800) 207-8633.
It's also available at online bookstores such as amazon.com or bn.com (Barnes &AMP; Noble).
&UR; Copyright 2000 Rodale Press Inc.
&QL; &UR; -0- &QL; &UR; Visit Prevention's Healthy Ideas Web site at www.healthyideas.com.
&QL; &UR; ------------------------------------------------ &QC; &UR; EDITOR: Visit The New York Times Syndicate Web site at http://www.nytimes.com/syndicate for more information on RODALE and other features.
&QL; &UR; ------------------------------------------------ &QC; &UR; NONSUBSCRIBERS: To publish a ``separate-buy'' feature article, it must be purchased.
Please contact one of these sales representatives: &LR; --.S.
and Canada: DEBRA WEYDERT in New Jersey at 1-732-390-4480; fax, 732-390-4697.
--urope and Asia: KARL HORWITZ in Paris at 47-42-17-11; fax, 47-42-80-44 or 47-42-18-81; telex, 282-942.
--atin America: ANA PENA in New York, 212-499-3333; fax, 212-499-3382. &QL;
The ancient technique of acupuncture is now being used for cosmetic surgery.
`` Needles unblock pathways through which the vital energy called Qi flows,'' says acupuncturist Henry Woo, Ph.D., of Newport Beach, Calif.
``Traditional Chinese Medicine treats a wide variety of conditions this way''.
Best known for relieving pain, acupuncture's uses in the West keep expanding.
Inserting needles into pressure points throughout the body to increase well-being goes back more than 2,5000 years.
But using the hair-thin needles to accentuate beauty represents a whole new concept in cosmetics.
``The needles stimulate circulation and tone the muscles underneath the skin,'' says Woo.
``Stimulating energy centers restores the Yin/Yang, or balance of energy in the body''.
``I'm pleased,'' says Sandy Ridout of Huntington Beach, California.
``I can see that the fine lines under my eyes lessened, and my smile lines diminished a lot.
I'm most pleased about that''.
COSMETIC ACUPUNCTURE Practitioners assert that lines around the eyes, and wrinkles that form around the mouth respond quickly to acupuncture treatments.
But inviting as the treatment seems, not many acupuncturists offer it, says Woo, because of the time involved.
In addition to cosmetic therapy, Woo treats a host of disorders with acupuncture, including addictions, weight problems, pain, adult acne, bedwetting and even infertility.
``It opens the channels through which energy flows, and rejuvenates the body's cells.
The improvement shows in the face by relaxing and strengthening the muscles below the skin, which helps eliminate wrinkles''.
Since people often fear needles, Woo uses techniques to ease their anxiety.
``I help patients overcome their fear of needles by first showing them that I use very fine, disposable needles made of steel.
They don't hurt''.
Background music and dim lighting further the relaxed atmosphere.
The number of needles that Woo uses can vary from patient to patient.
Some require as few as nine, and others need 16 or so placed strategically around their face.
``The needles bring more circulation to the area where they are inserted,'' says Woo, ``which brings more rejuvenating oxygen to the cells.
The needles activate the fiber under the skin too, and give it more elasticity''.
NEEDLE PLACEMENT After Woo cleans the patient's face with alcohol, he uses tape to put pressure on the muscles.
Anesthesia cream is applied to the sensitive lip area to avoid discomfort.
Then he inserts the needles at angles of less than 15 degrees, mostly pointing toward the top of the head.
This takes about 15 minutes, and the needles remain in place for about a half hour.
Woo also inserts two needles into the hand to stimulate circulation to the face.
``It's the same pressure point used to stop a toothache or a headache,'' he explains.
Woo cleanses the face again with alcohol after removing the needles, and massages the patient's face for about five minutes.
A Chinese cream restores moisture and nourishes the skin.
Ten treatments usually do the job.
Then, maintenance visits once or twice a month renew the benefits.
EASY TO KEEP UP Much cheaper than a surgical facelift, patients pay about $45 for each acupuncture treatment.
Woo explains that restoring the essential energy, or Qi, (pronounced chee) improves mood and increases a sense of well being.
This shows in the face.
``Sometimes patients experience a momentary stinging or tingling sensation when needles are inserted,'' he says.
``That is then followed by a complete sense of relaxation and ease''.
Breaking up energy stagnation and restoring a balanced flow of Qi through the body represents a radically different approach to achieving beauty than a surgical facelift.
The focus on the whole person and improving energy flow appeals to many.
``From what I understand, surgical facelifts last 10 or 12 years even if you have good skin tone,'' says Sandy Ridout, ``which I do.
Eventually, I'll probably have a facelift like that.
But if I can put it off, that's a good idea, I think.
Acupuncture seems like a better way to get rid of wrinkles right now because it's easy to keep up.
And there's no pain involved, or recuperation time.
I enjoy the procedure''.
ACUPUNCTURE USED WIDELY A consensus statement from the National Institutes of Health states that acupuncture has been used by millions of Americans.
Thousands of physicians, dentists, and other practitioners have used acupuncture for the relief of pain, and many other conditions.
Since the field still remains relatively new to the public, issues such as training, licensure, and insurance coverage need further clarification.
The majority of states offer licensure or registration for acupuncturists, but not all states recognize the same credentialing exam.
A nationally recognized exam has been established, however, for physicians who become acupuncturists.
The Federal Food and Drug Administration recently removed acupuncture needles from the category of ``experimental medical devices,'' and now regulates them just like surgical scalpels and hypodermic syringes.
This ensures good manufacturing practices and high standards of sterility.
The FDA recommends that the needles be used only once.
The NIH consensus statement lists many health problems that acupuncture may help mitigate including addiction, rehabilitation after stoke, headaches, menstrual cramps, myofascial pain, back pain, asthma, osteoarthritis, carpal tunnel syndrome and fibromyalgia.
The consensus panel concluded that further research is likely to uncover additional areas where acupuncture interventions will be helpful.
Acupuncture's positive effects seem to radiate in an all encompassing way for some patients.
``I feel like I'm brighter,'' says Sandy Ridout.
``It gives me a better feeling just to know I don't have wrinkles.
``I'm a preventive type person, and my appearance and my mood are important to me.
I needed a perker-upper and this is it''.
---- (The HealthSurfing.com Web site at http://healthsurfing.com contains further information).
(Distributed by New York Times Special Features)
WASHINGTON (AP) --A third new drug for people suffering from the pain of arthritis has been approved by federal regulators.
The Food and Drug Administration said Friday it has approved meloxicam tablets for the treatment of osteoarthritis.
Meloxicam will be marketed under the name Mobic by Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals and Abbott Laboratories and is expected to be available in early May.
The wholesale price is expected to be $1.98 per tablet and dosage is once a day.
Mobic is the third new arthritis drug approved in the last two years, joining Celebrex and Vioxx.
Millions of people depend on aspirin, ibuprofen, naproxen and other pills to relieve pain.
But these can cause ulcers, stomach bleeding and other side effects, especially in long-term users.
In clinical trials Mobic had a low instance of gastrointestinal side effects, the manufacturer said.
----- On the net: Food and Drug Administration: http://www.fda.gov Abbott Laboratories: http://www.abbott.com
&LR; &LR; New insights into the biochemistry of pain are starting to pay off in safer, and perhaps even more effective, treatment options for chronic sufferers.
One new type of painkiller, known as COX-2 inhibitors, just hit pharmacy shelves.
The drugs appear to be no more effective at fighting pain than traditional anti-inflammatory medications such as ibuprofen and aspirin, but offer the advantage of fewer side effects.
That is a major plus for people who must use pain relievers long-term and risk such problems as stomach bleeding and ulcers.
The first of the new drugs, Celebrex, developed by Monsanto's G.D.
Searle &AMP; Co.
pharmaceutical unit and co-marketed by Pfizer Inc.
, was launched commercially last month.
A different drug of the same type, Merck &AMP; Co.'s Vioxx, is awaiting approval by the Food and Drug Administration and could be on the market by summer.
Industry analysts view the drugs as potential blockbusters, likely to command at least 10 percent of the market for common pain relievers.
COX-2 drugs are designed primarily for those with rheumatoid arthritis, which afflicts about 2.1 million people in the United States, and for painful flareups of osteoarthritis, the ``wear-and-tear'' form of the ailment, which affects an estimated 20.7 million people.
Until now, these patients and others in chronic pain have relied mostly on nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, or NSAIDs, sold over-the-counter or at prescription strength under brand names such as Advil, Daypro, Lodine and Naprosyn.
The drugs are generally effective but can be harmful with constant use.
A 1997 study of arthritis patients showed at least 107,000 hospitalizations and 16,500 deaths a year from NSAID-related problems.
COX-2 drugs block production of an enzyme called cyclooxygenase-2, which produces painful inflammation.
Unlike NSAIDs, however, they do not interfere with the closely related COX-1 enzyme, which helps build a protective lining in the stomach and gastrointestinal tract.
Searle began selling Celebrex for $2.42 per 200 milligram pill, less than expected but still more than some HMOs might be willing to pay, especially for patients without a demonstrated problem with NSAIDs.
The COX-2 inhibitors, meanwhile, are not the only new possibilities for fighting pain: --Ziconotide, awaiting FDA approval, has been touted as a potent alternative to morphine in cases of severe pain.
Derived from sea snail venom, it is designed to block calcium channels in nerve cells of the spine, interrupting the flow of pain signals to the brain.
--Enbrel, first in a new class of rheumatoid arthritis medicines called biologic response modifiers, soaks up excess ``tumor necrosis factor,'' a chemical secreted by immune cells involved in joint inflammations.
The drug, made by Immunex Corp.
of Seattle, was approved by the FDA last year1998cq &LR; for use in adults.
New studies show that it may also be effective in childhood forms of arthritis.
--Neurontin, known generically as gabapentin, is an established epilepsy drug that has been shown to work against hard-to-treat nerve pain from shingles or diabetes.
--Tests are underway to establish whether memantine _ used in Germany to treat Parkinson's disease _ can ease the pain of diabetic neuropathy.
The drug blocks NMDA receptors, nerve cell sites that help relay pain signals.
WEST PALM BEACH, Fla.
_ The Muhammad Ali who danced around a generation of heavyweight fighters and set the standard against which all boxers are judged leans deeply into the armrests of his chair and rises.
He walks gingerly to a door frame, lingers, leans for a moment into the wall with his right shoulder, and bidding his audience of three to pay attention to the soles of his black high-top sneakers, he levitates.
In the moment, the years fall away, as does the Parkinson's disease that has stolen his grace.
In the moment, Ali is again, the magician.
And the magician has risen.
He has come to suburban Boca Raton on a pilgrimage, he says, to return to the days when he floated above the ring and punished his opponents with a beauty so startling everyone looked.
``I'm going to make a comeback,'' Ali says, his gravelly voice barely above a whisper.
``That's my dream''.
He arrived last Tuesday from Canada to begin treatments with Jerry Jacobson, a retired dentist and oral surgeon who lives in Jupiter.
Inside an office at West Boca Medical Center, Jacobson is surrounded by acolytes.
They are the parents of children with cerebral palsy and brain damage, and they believe in his magic.
They sing his praises.
They believe that the Jacobson resonator will deliver their children.
Ali, too, has come to be saved.
Modern medicine, the establishment's best and brightest, have failed him.
``I've been to 15 different doctors,'' Ali says softly, his expression flat.
``None of them have been able to do anything''.
So The Greatest has sat, for five sessions now, on a cushion in a $15 lawn chair between two black, eight-foot high circles.
He has sat and prayed that the self-described genius with the white hair and white suit is telling the truth, and has figured out a way to rejigger the particles of his body and deliver him.
``They have no cure,'' he says, again his voice barely audible.
``Maybe next year.
In ten years.
Next month''.
His mind has never stopped working, his acuity has not been diminished.
He closes his eyes in mid-conversation as if he is asleep, and reopens them a moment later, wide-eyed, in mock surprise at the faces looking at him.
``I am the most recognized man on earth,'' he says.
``Of all the movies stars, of all the athletes ''...
He turns to a teenage girl sitting nearby.
``If you saw me on the street, would you recognize me''?
He asks.
The girls answer yes.
``Everybody knows who I am,'' he says.
A smile crosses his face.
It is the face of the most recognized man on earth, and it is waiting to be saved.
The legendary boxer is just one of many celebrities Jacobson says he's treated with his signature Jacobson resonance machine, which emits a weak magnetic field.
Jacobson is using the electromagnetic machine to treat everything from a bad knee to neurological disorders like Ali's.
He is still working on proving the machine will help patients overcome osteoarthritis in the knee so the Food &AMP; Drug Administration will give him approval to mass produce the gadgets.
The machines are built at NASA's Stennis Space Center in Mississippi.
NASA got involved with the help of U.S.
Senate Majority Leader Tent Lott, R-Miss.
, after Jacobson promised to mass produce the machines in Mississippi if he receives FDA approval.
Researchers must treat at least 135 patients in the study for the FDA.
About 70 of them are patients at two centers at West Boca Medical Center _ the Pioneer Services Medical Center and the National Medical and Research Institute.
The hospital says it has no affiliation with the research.
The companies say they rent space from the hospital.
About 120 people are being treated for illnesses that are not part of the FDA study.
Most of the patients are seen in suburban Boca Raton; the rest are being treated at clinics at West Gables Rehabilitation Hospital in Miami-Dade County and at Coastal Rehabilitation Medical Center in Gulf Port, Miss.
, Jacobson said.
The treatment is free to those in the FDA study.
It costs others about $100 a treatment.
And more research is being done at Cornell University in New York and University of Oklahoma.
In 1995, Jacobson promised 11-year-old Angelie Diya that he could cure her AIDS with his machine.
The young girl had won over many hearts when she told her classmates at Jupiter Farms Elementary School that she had the disease.
Diya has been to the clinic for pain-relief treatments, said Fank Caviano, chief operating officer of Pioneer.
In the case of Parkinson's, Jacobson theorizes that his machine's magnetic waves will awaken Ali's homeotic genes.
He says those are the genes responsible for making all your body parts what they are.
Making a liver, a liver; an eye, an eye; a brain, a brain.
They shut down after their initial work in young children.
Once the homeotic genes are stimulated, Jacobson hopes they will regenerate cells in Ali's brain and produce dopamine, which helps us move.
It is the lack of dopamine that results in Parkinson's.
``It's a tough case,'' Jacobson said.
``He is a monumental figure.
An icon.
We are doing everything in our power to help him''.
Although homeotic genes are described in some medical literature and universities' Web sites, they aren't listed in a widely-used medical dictionary or a term familiar to Dr.
Robert Brodner, a West Palm Beach neurosurgeon.
And Brodner, who has done brain surgery on about 60 people with Parkinson's, said that regeneration within the brain is ``minimal to nonexistent''.
``So personally, I don't know what this fellow is talking about.
I only hope that he does,'' Brodner said Friday.
``I don't quite believe this, but on the other hand it will be interesting to see the affect and see if this is successful.
Any treatment that doesn't have the potential to harm a patient can be considered''.
Without a miracle cure, the prognosis for people with Parkinson's is unknown.
Some can last years without any noticeable affects.
Some live for more than 40 years with the disease.
Others are almost immediately bedridden and incoherent.
These conditions make patients susceptible to other problems like choking, pneumonia and falls _ which can result in death.
One strike against Ali, a four-time heavyweight champ, is the relatively young age when the Parkinson's set in.
Now 56, he was in his early 40s.
Ali is not the only sports star to get Jacobson's treatment.
Professional Bowlers Association Hall of Famer Dave Davies// of Boynton Beach was in constant pain for more than three years after his right kneecap was broken.
His pain disappeared after a partial knee replacement last fall and after treatment at Pioneer.
Pro Golfer Doug Tewell, who works for the Golf Channel, also is amazed by the pain relief he's received.
He thought he was headed for surgery on his right elbow.
But after several treatments with Jacobson in the last month, he is holding off on the operation.
``I had trouble picking up glass with my right arm without severe pain,'' he said.
``I went from severe pain and possible surgery to winning $115,000 in two weeks''.
Douglas Belkin and Mary War write for the Palm Beach Post, West Palm Beach, Fla.
Story Filed By Cox Newspapers For Use By Clients of the New York Times News Service
NEW YORK (AP) _ Drug makers, eyeing Viagra's runaway success with profit envy, expect the drive for arthritis relief will yield the next wonder drug.
Some industry experts believe Celebra, a painkiller that cuts inflammation but avoids the stomach-damaging effects of aspirin, ibuprofen and acetaminophen, could outsell the impotency drug by millions of dollars a year.
Drug makers' ceaseless efforts to stock America's medicine chest have long plowed research money into trying to ease such ills as cancer, obesity and chronic pain.
But the road to a cancer cure is littered with promising treatments that fizzled.
And last year's recall of two diet pills left many dieters wary of weight-loss drugs.
Now comes a new class of super painkillers with a singular advantage: They could be on pharmacy shelves within months.
And industry watchers believe millions of Americans will gladly toss their bottles of common painkillers for an alternative that saves their stomachs.
Kathryn Howe already has.
Rheumatoid arthritis left the 51-year-old executive secretary's joints so swollen she couldn't type or take long walks.
Rolling over in bed hurt.
She kept the swelling under control with prescription-strength versions of drugs such as Tylenol and Advil.
But 15 years of them left her with an inflamed stomach and rectal bleeding.
Last year, her doctor asked her to test an unapproved drug called Celebra.
Now she walks, swims, does low-impact aerobics and even lifts weights comfortably with no apparent side effects.
``A person can shake my hand and I'm not in pain,'' the Eastlake, Ohio, resident said.
``I can hold a pencil''.
Some analysts predict Celebra will outsell Viagra, the lucrative Pfizer Inc.
impotency treatment that became the fastest-selling drug in history its first month.
``That's what I would put my finger on as the next blockbuster drug, not only in terms of medicinal value but in terms of cult following,'' said Stephen Tang, a drug industry specialist with A.T.
Kearney, a management consulting firm in New York.
Typical estimates call for annual Viagra sales to reach dlrs 3 billion by 2002.
Celebra sales could eventually top dlrs 4 billion, said Salomon Smith Barney analyst Christina Heuer.
With the global market for prescription painkillers, not including over-the-counter sales, at dlrs 5 billion, Ms.
Heuer predicts Celebra could be ``the most significant new drug introduction of 1999''.
Celebra is expected to be the first out of the blocks from a new class of drugs called cox-2 inhibitors, so named because they block the inflammatory enzyme cyclooxygenase.
Aspirin and similar anti-inflammatory drugs do that too, but they go too far, also blocking the cox-1 enzyme that protects the stomach lining.
Doctors believe the new class of painkillers may also provide a significant side benefit.
Patients are more likely to get better faster, or improve more profoundly, if they're willing to take their medicine and stay on it.
When Mrs.
Howe was prescribed standard anti-inflammatory drugs that hurt her stomach, she conceded, ``I wasn't a very compliant patient''.
Celebra's manufacturer, Monsanto Corp.'s Searle unit, is expected to ask the Food and Drug Administration for an expedited six-month review by September.
If that happens, the drug could be on the market by early next year in the United States and late 1999 abroad.
Having tested Celebra's effects on rheumatoid arthritis, osteoarthritis and dental pain, scientists are now researching signs that Celebra might help prevent colon cancer and Alzheimer's disease, in which cox-2 is believed to play a role.
If it is approved for rheumatoid arthritis, the most severe joint disease, doctors would be free to prescribe it for a number of painful conditions.
Searle will have to move quickly.
Merck and Co.
is about six months behind in developing a rival painkiller named Vioxx.
Glaxo Wellcome PLC, Johnson and Johnson and Roche Laboratories also have cox-2 drugs on the way.
Already Merck and Searle are entangled in a legal battle over patents.
Monsanto, Searle's parent, has agreed to be acquired by American Home Products Corp.
, but the new owner won't be marketing Celebra.
Searle signed up Pfizer for that agreeable task long before the acquisition.
Whoever handles it, Wall Street appears to be betting on Celebra.
``Cox-2, that's potentially the next big blockbuster, and I think Monsanto and Pfizer have the upper hand,'' said Hemant K.
Shah, an independent drug industry analyst in Warren, New Jersey.
``The first product always has the advantage''.
Prozac's dlrs 2.6 billion in worldwide sales, for instance, makes it the best-selling antidepressant years after similar rivals _ Pfizer's Zoloft, Glaxo's Wellbutrin, SmithKline Beecham's Paxil _ came on the market.
In addition to the cox-2 class, Wall Street analysts recognize several candidates as wild-card contenders in the race for the next wonder drug: _ Pfizer's antibiotic Trovan.
Ms. Heuer estimates the drug could bring in dlrs 1.5 billion in 2002, matching 1997 sales of SmithKline's top-selling antibiotic Augmentin.
_ Avandia, an oral diabetes drug by SmithKline.
Analysts say it could become a blockbuster if it lacks the side effects of Warner-Lambert's Rezulin, which was pulled from the market in the United Kingdom after a few patients suffered liver failure.
_Leptin, Amgen Inc.'s weight-loss hormone.
Some patients lost 35 pounds in six months, but doctors remain wary of obesity drugs since last August's recall of the diet pills Redux and fen-phen, a combination of fenfluramine and phentermine.
Knoll Pharmaceuticals' new diet pill, Meridia, drew a lackluster 11,185 prescriptions last month, according to researcher IMS Health.
Leptin is also being tested on diabetes patients.
But even blockbusters will have a hard time topping Viagra, with an unprecedented 1.7 million prescriptions in three months.
``There's never been a drug like this so far in the history of the business,'' said Joseph P.
Riccardo, a drug industry analyst at Bear Stearns and Co.
in New York.
HOUSTON _ Orthopedic surgeon Bruce Moseley, a clinical associate professor at Baylor College of Medicine, was skeptical about a commonplace operation performed on the painful knees of older patients.
The patients suffered from osteoarthritis, a crippling, irreversible condition in which the cartilage covering the bones has worn away with age.
It is the major cause of mobility loss among the elderly.
Arthroscopic surgery, in which doctors work through tiny incisions using a ``scope'' to see, is effective in repairing torn cartilage from injuries.
It cannot replace the missing cartilage in arthritic patients; doctors can only wash out the joint and scrape, or debride, the rough spots.
Yet nearly everyone said their arthritic knee pain decreased after surgery.
The question was, why?
In an unusual, groundbreaking study, Moseley and other Houston researchers are comparing actual surgery to phony, or placebo, surgery to see whether the operation really helps _ or if people simply believe it relieves their pain.
``Are they better because of the procedure or the placebo effect''? said Dr.
Nelda Wray, an internist who runs a research unit financed by Baylor College of Medicine and Veterans Affairs.
``(Moseley's) argument was, `we don't know why they hurt in the first place, and whether this works'''.
The placebo effect is a well-documented phenomenon in which people experience an improvement in their condition in response to a phony therapy, such as a sugar pill.
Scientists have recently begun looking at placebos in the context of surgery.
Initially, Moseley, who is best known as the team physician for the National Basketball Association's Houston Rockets, was interested in comparing the benefits of rinsing and scraping the knee joint vs.
rinsing alone.
He suspected that washing away debris was what actually gave people relief.
When Wray suggested that they also take a look at the placebo effect, Moseley was taken aback.
``We said, `What do you mean placebo?
This is surgery'''!
Moseley said.
``The more we learned about it, the more we realized surgery may have the strongest placebo effect of any intervention''.
A pilot study of 10 patients yielded intriguing results.
Five of the patients received placebo surgery, just three shallow nicks on their skin so their knees would look like the other patients'.
Two years after sham surgery, patients reported the same amount of relief from pain and swelling as those who had the real operation.
Four of the five placebo patients said the surgery was so worthwhile that they would recommend it to a friend.
One patient even requested the operation be repeated on the other knee.
``We know from the (medical) literature on the placebo effect that it is a significant effect, and the amount of the effect is greater with the magnitude of the placebo,'' Wray said.
``If the pill is bigger, you'll measure a bigger effect''.
Wray suspects that people get better just from an encounter with a surgeon.
The white lab coat, the dramatic setting, the declaration of ``I'm going to make you better'' have a powerful effect.
In the current study, the doctors are comparing 180 patients at the Veterans Affairs Medical Center divided into three groups.
The experiment gives patients a shot at a $2,000 to $5,000 procedure that the VA does not usually offer for arthritis because of its questionable benefit.
Sixty are getting their knee joints scraped and rinsed, 60 are getting the rinse only, and 60 are getting no surgery at all.
All of the patients are given a mild sedative and all awake 30 minutes later, but only the ones getting a surgical procedure receive full anesthesia.
Patients will be tracked for two years.
Initially, the doctors met resistance from hospital administrators when they proposed the study.
To answer concerns about informed consent, participants were required to state, in their own handwriting, that they understood there was a one-third chance they would get placebo surgery.
A more difficult question was how doctors could justify giving placebo patients a sedative, even if the risk of adverse reaction was tiny.
The answer came simply by looking at the question from another angle.
``The bigger issue to our mind is the 400,000 people a year getting the surgery without even knowing if it works,'' said Baruch Brody, director of the Center for Medical Ethics and Health Policy at Baylor, who helped design the study.
Brody reasoned that the risks posed by an unproven surgical procedure were far greater than those from a sedative.
The study will be finished next year, with results scheduled to be published in October 2000.
If researchers find out the surgery is clearly beneficial, ``we should probably be doing it more than we're doing now,'' Moseley said.
But if sham surgery works as well as or better than real surgery, will doctors recommend that everyone get the placebo operation?
``That's not what we're going to propose,'' Moseley said.
``We'll have to say that as expensive as arthroscopy surgery (for arthritis) is, we probably can redirect those resources in a better way for treatment of arthritis''.
Marvin Gilbert, a VA patient who lives near Cleveland, Texas, signed up for the current study two years ago.
The 67-year-old water-well drill contractor recently completed his follow-up visits and learned he had actual surgery _ and he's convinced it worked.
A hand grenade in the Korean War paralyzed his left knee, and osteoarthritis in his right knee worsened over the years until he could only walk a few steps.
A few days after surgery, Gilbert was walking.
Soon, he could jump and run _ and he didn't care whether it was because of sham surgery or the real thing.
``It didn't matter.
It stopped the pain,'' he said.
``I didn't wonder what it was''.
&QL; XXXX END OF STORY &QL;
LOS ANGELES, November 4 (Xinhua) --Two universities in the United States said Thursday that they have received a five-year grant to establish a center for the joint study of mind-body interactions and health.
The focus of the center is to understand how the mind influences the development of and recovery from diverse diseases, including infectious diseases, osteoarthritis, early cardiovascular disease and breast cancer, said the University of Pittsburgh and Camegie Mellon University in a statement.
The grant of 10 million U.S. dollars the two universities in Pittsburgh have received was from the National Institute of Health (NIH), which funded four other centers for this initiative.
Prior to the establishment of the new center, researchers at both universities have undertaken individual studies of mind-body interactions and health.
They found that women with increased anger or hostility have a greater risk for coronary artery disease, and people who have a larger support network of friends and relatives get sick less often than those who lead solitary lives.
One study shows that osteoarthritis has the potential to compromise the health of family members as a result of the patient's negative responses to symptoms and the burden of providing emotional support and task assistance to the patient.
At the new center, researchers will study the risk for respiratory illnesses such as the flu which may be affected by the health of an individual's material and non-material relationships.
Focusing on older adults with osteoarthritis, researchers will determine if the patients and their spousal caregivers experience greater health benefits from an educational intervention targeted at both rather than just at the patient.
Doctors will also examine women's perception of stress, their attitude and coping responses as well as physiological reactions to the stress in their lives as potential markers of risk for cardiovascular disease.
Finally researchers hope to learn whether psychosocial interventions can be designed to enhance adjustment and lower recurrence and mortality among women with early breast cancer and to find out the psychological, behavioral and biological mechanisms through which the interventions operate.
IN the treatment of rheumatic disorders the mainstay drugs are initially for pain relief.
This is followed by drugs that stop the underlying disease process and reduce inflammation.
Pain is the main symptom of most rheumatic disorders and pain-relieving medicines are used to control them.
They include paracetamol, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and locally applied linaments and ointments.
In the last five years, a better understanding of various rheumatic disorders has been created through immunology studies.
That has resulted in various drugs normally used in transplant treatment being applied in rheumatic disorders, for example, cyclosporin.
In the last two years, Cox-2 selective NSAIDs (meloxicam) have been introduced around the world for pain relief in rheumatic disorders.
They are said to be safer than existing NSAIDs in causing less gastrointestinal complications.
Up to now, all existing NSAIDs are known to cause gastric irritation.
A certain herbal product has been tried in rheumatic disorders in Denmark.
It is based on the patented ginger extract HMP-33 which is extracted from a special variety of ginger found only in one particular region in China.
Developed over six years by a Danish team led by biochemist Dr Morten Weidner, it comes in a soft gelatin capsule.
It was recently introduced here and is available over the counter.
Apparently, one capsule has properties equivalent to 6,600mg of dried ginger.
The largest and most recent trial to test the efficacy and safety of HMP-33 was conducted two years ago by a team of doctors from Copenhagen Municipal Hospital, headed by chief rheumatologist Dr Henning Bliddal and principal clinical investigator Dr Allan Rosetzsky.
Dr Bliddal and his team had carried out a random double-blind placebo-controlled study on 56 hospital patients suffering from osteoarthritis.
The findings revealed that the product can provide relief from bodily aches and seemingly without causing negative side effects.
Similar clinical studies are currently being carried out in Australia and the United States.
Generally, says a local doctor who requested anonymity, herbal products are not as well tested in clinical trials as medications which have to be registered for use in hospital pharmacies.
He adds trials with ginger extracts in rheumatic disorders have not been actively carried out in Malaysia and local doctors are awaiting confirmatory tests before recommending such products to patients.
Besides drugs to relieve pain, medication to stop the underlying disease process and reduce inflammation is also prescribed for rheumatic patients.
Some patients may need disease modifying drugs to prevent fibrosis of the tissues and joints and possibly internal organ damage.
Examples of such drugs include sulphasalazine, chloroquine, penicillamine, gold and methotrexate.
Steroids in the correct amount and for the proper duration of treatment are given to patients to reduce inflammation which may damage the body.
However, these are also the most commonly abused drugs because they are mixed illegally into herbal remedies.
Rheumatic disorders cover all medical diseases of the motoric system - bones, joints, muscles and tendons - as well as those related to the connective tissue.
The different diseases vary from acute backstrain and tennis elbow to osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis.
That means the treatment of each rheumatic disorder is individualised and aimed at the cause and source of the pain as well as underlying inflammation.
Based on Government hospital attendance records one in four Malaysians above 40 visits outpatient clinics for a rheumatic complaint.
This is probably the same in private clinics.
GENEVA, July 9 (Xinhua) --Insurance companies warned here on Tuesday of enormous economic costs if global actions to reduce greenhouse gas emissions come too slowly.
The warning was made by about 60 insurance companies in a position paper they presented Tuesday to an international negotiating conference on climate change resumed in Geneva on Monday.
The insurers expressed their concern that while the effect of climate change on the frequency or severity of extreme weather events remains unknown, it is clear that even small shifts in regional climate zones or storm patterns could lead to increased property damage.
They also pointed out that climate change could potentially have large implications for investment activities as society anticipates and adapts to new climate regime.
The insurers called on countries to take precautionary actions to reduce the risks of climate change.
According to them, the most efficient precautionary measure is an early and substantial reduction of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gas emissions.
They also urged governments to promote scientific research that will establish what threshold level of atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases should be considered dangerous.
According to industry sources, the insurance industry is currently under stress from a series of "Billion Dollar" storms since 1987.
This has led to dramatic increases in claims, reduced availability of insurance, and higher premiums.
"When a major industry such as the insurance sector starts to worry, so should we," commented Elizabeth Dowdeswell, Exective Director of the UN Environment Programme.
"While some industries think more about the costs of taking action against climate change, insurers know from experience how expensive it can be when people fail to protect themselves adequately from risks," she added.
How fast to reduce greenhouse gas emissions is the focus of the latest negotiating conference, known officially as the second session of the Conference of the Parties to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change.
In the treaty, which was adopted at the 1992 Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, industrialized countries agreed to take measures to return their greenhouse gas emissions to 1990 levels by the year 2000.
But some environmental reports said almost none of them will meet that target.
While the UN and a number of non-governmental organizations are calling for drastic global action to reduce climate change, major industries in some countries are urging their governments to take a go-slow approach, arguing against steps they say could cost jobs and growth before the problem is better understood.
CANBERRA, January 13 (Xinhua) --Australian scientists warn that a deteriorating marine ecosystem in the Antarctic and sub-Antarctic regions foreshadows further natural disasters caused by global warming.
Scientists at Macquarie Island near the Antarctic note that elephant seals and penguins were starving off because of feed shortage caused by shifting ocean currents and climate changes in the region, today's Age newspaper reported.
Meteorological records show that the average annual ocean temperature near the island has increased to 5.4 degrees from 4.5 degrees in 1912.
Jeremy Smith, leader of Australian scientific teams on the island, said that the annual temperature on Macquarie Island was rising at twice the rate of the rest of the world.
"Macquarie Island is a barometer, it's a measuring device for large-scale global changes," he said.
"Global change is now a certainty," he said.
Higher ocean surface temperatures caused by the greenhouse effect of the global atmosphere will alter the direction of ocean currents.
As a result, the number of plankton and fish will change as the marine ecosystem is disrupted.
Elephant seals and penguins population are collapsing as their prey stocks are moving away from the Antarctic waters.
Scientists on Macquarie Island found that the number of elephant seals and rock hopper penguins has dropped by half in the past few years.
Similar things have happened on Heard Island, 5,400 km west of Macquarie Island.
Worst still, the rock hopper penguin population on Campbell Island near New Zealand has crashed by 94 percent.
Cindy Hull, a zoologist at the University of Tasmania in Australia, also found the unprecedented fact this week that 16 percent of eggs of rock hopper penguins on Macquarie Island were infertile.
She said that this was an indication that female penguins were not getting enough food during their foraging in the ocean.
If food continued to disappear from the ocean, bigger penguins might also be affected, she said.
She said the decline in rock hoppers might be an indicator of the ecological impact of global warming.
Scientists on Macquarie Island fear that a one-degree change of global temperature would completely change one of the biggest ecosystem in the world.
In 1995, the sunniest December ever recorded on the island halted all major streams on it.
Scientists believe that the slightest hint of change at Macquarie is a clear signal that something significant is happening in the Southern Ocean.
The Southern Ocean stretches like a belt around the globe.
It is wedged between the Antarctic in the south, and the Australian, South American and African continents to the north.
"It saddens me to see, in a pristine environment like this, the deterioration of the natural ecosystem," Smith said.
WELLINGTON, February 16 (Xinhua) --Huge tracts of Earth's surface could disappear under rising oceans, creating millions of" environmental refugees," British climate scientist John Houghton told a meeting of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
The panel, which was set up by the United Nations in 1988 to investigate the pace of climate change and advise governments on potential risks, is meeting in Auckland, the biggest city of New Zealand, with 120 experts participating.
Houghton said at the panel Tuesday that one estimate suggests up to 150 million people may be made homeless as oceans swell with warmer temperature caused by the greenhouse effect.
A rise in sea levels of up to one meter could happen by next century, affecting areas of Egypt, southern China and Bangladesh, he said, adding that a rise of one meter would wipe out the homes of up to 6 million people in Bangladesh alone.
New Zealand Environment Minister Marian Hobbs gave an opening speech at the meeting, pledging that her country would honor its international greenhouse gas control targets and take steps to reduce carbon dioxide emissions linked to global warming.
She said New Zealand will introduce public education programs on climate change, greater investment in public transport and stronger energy efficiency measures.
At the top of the agenda of the three-day conference, which will end Thursday, is its next report on climate change, due to be presented to the United Nations in 2001, according to the New Zealand Press Association (NZPA).
The report will contain an assessment of the pace of climate change and strategies for governments to deal with it.
Two such reports were already submitted by the panel in 1990 and 1995.
NZPA reported that scientists estimate that greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere have increased by about 30 percent since pre-industrial times.
If the present rate of emission continues,the amount of carbon dioxide will be double its pre-industrial level by the end of this century.
Evidence is mounting that emissions of greenhouse gases from burning fossil fuels, agriculture and deforestation are affecting climate, it added.
There are 160 signatories to the U.N.
Climate Convention, an agreement designed to stabilize greenhouse gases at levels that would avoid catastrophic climate change.
WASHINGTON _ Global warming is not making some people in the nation's coldest state happy.
As higher temperatures melt some of the ice in Alaska, natives who live in or near the Arctic Circle said here Wednesday they are worried that their way of life will disappear.
Sterling Golongergen, 43, a community development worker in Savoonga, an island town in the Bering Sea, said at a news conference that as the ice melts, hunting gets more difficult.
``I have two sons who are being taught, hands on, by their father, uncles (and other elders) to hunt walrus, seal, whale, birds and fish,'' she said.
``But this year the ice packs left sooner.
There was very little game for them to hunt, (which) cut short our food supply'' and the time that her sons had to learn ``how to continue this way of life''.
She added: ``We do not really understand the science or the politics of environmental change, but it affects our lives''.
John Kulowiyi, 76, a whaling captain also from Savoonga, said ice around the village is slowly getting thinner year-round.
``We never go out (to hunt) this year by walking on the ice,'' he said.
``It's too dangerous for us''.
So in order to hunt, the men must travel 50 to 80 miles from the village, which makes the trips expensive for them, he said.
Amy ``Kalee'' Kreider, director of the U.S. global warming campaign for Greenpeace, an environmental organization which sponsored the news conference, said, ``In most of the lower 48 states, ice is seen as bad.
That's not the way things are seen in Alaska''.
A new report on global climate change released by Greenpeace said that as the seas warm up and glaciers melt, animals such as walruses seals, and caribous move north to colder temperatures.
These animals are a staple food for villagers in the Bering and Chukchi Seas region near Siberia.
The report said some plants are dying as tundra dries out because permafrost, ground that is frozen all year, is thawing and water is draining off.
Kreider also said the pesky sprucebark beetle has moved further north as temperatures climb.
She said it has already ``devastated a huge swathe of forest in southern Alaska (and)...
as far north as Fairbanks''.
The report cited interviews with natives in eight villages in the Bering and Chukchi Seas.
Kreider said Greenpeace expects Congress to hold hearings in January on the Alaskan climate change and that some of the people quoted in the report will testify.
She urged U.S. approval of the so-called Kyoto Protocol, an accord reached by negotiators around the world last December that would require industrial nations to make significant cuts in carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gas emissions by 2012.
The Greenpeace report noted that the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, a group of 1,600 climate scientists from around the world, said Arctic sea ice has decreased 2.8 percent each decade since the late 1970s.
The panel also said that upper Arctic ice, which had been 2 meters (6 1/2 feet) to 3 meters (just under 9 feet) thick, now averages about 1.5 meters (under 5 feet) or less .
JOHANNESBURG, October 8 (Xinhua) --South African Environment Minister Valli Moosa said on Friday that global warming resulted in the rise in incidence of malaria.
Addressing a meeting in Cape Town of ministers and officials from the countries of Southern African Development Community (SADC), he said that in the past year South Africa had recorded the highest average temperatures.
He said global warming and climate change was not simply a matter which could be left to researchers and experts.
"It is more and more a matter which is impacting on all people".
One of the results of this had been a rise in the incidence of malaria, he said, adding that "this is a matter which is of grave concern to us".
The SADC meeting aims to formulate regional policies on matters such as desertification, climate change and biodiversity.
Countries attending the meeting, hosted by South Africa, include Angola, Lesotho, Malawi, Mauritius, Mozambique, Namibia, Swaziland, Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
WASHINGTON (AP --Rising ocean temperatures, perhaps caused by global climate change, are threatening to push salmon out of their Pacific Ocean habitat, two marine biologist said today, citing as early evidence the decline in Alaska salmon.
``Whether the changes are related to global warming is not statistically clear, but it's what appears to be happening,'' said Jim Barry, a marine biologist at the Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute in California.
The scientists said at a news conference that warmer ocean waters in the Pacific has caused a much higher mortality rate among salmon.
It also has produced a dramatic shift in plankton species that has interfered in food supplies for marine life and seabirds, they said.
``We don't fully realize what's happening...
but these are the sort of events we expect from global warming,'' said David Welch, head of the salmon research project for the Canadian National Department of Fisheries.
Welch, who is based in British Columbia, said he is convinced that ocean warming reflects broader climate change and raises the possibility of ``large-scale potential changes in the marine ecosystem''.
While scientists agree the oceans have become warmer, the reasons remain in dispute.
Some scientists argue it reflects broader climate change as a result of heat trapping pollution, but others say it simply reflects cyclical temperature changes, including the El Nino phenomenon.
Whatever the reason, higher ocean temperatures already have had dramatic impact on Pacific salmon fisheries, the two biologists said at a news conference sponsored by the World Wildlife Fund and the Marine Conservation Biology Institute.
Welch cited as clear evidence of concern the dramatic decline in Alaska's Pacific salmon population in 1997 and again last year.
Salmon returning to swim up the Fraser River in British Columbia have been fewer in number and much smaller than in years past, he said.
And the in-river mortality rate among salmon returning to spawn soared to 76 percent in 1997, he said.
Welch attributed the smaller fish and high death rate to the warmer ocean waters that, he said, sapped the salmon of their energy and strength.
``We're starting to see a very troubling perspective on this,'' he said.
The biologists said the high sea temperatures in 1997 and 1998 produced a rate bloom of phytoplankton in the northern Pacific waters typical of waters closer to the equator, causing changes in the food chain.
The reduced size of returning salmon and the decrease in overall numbers ``suggests large-scale starvation,'' they said.
Welch said that if the warming continues as part of a broader global climate change, the salmon as a species may be forced northward into the Bering Sea, abandoning their traditional Pacific habitat.
While that may still be 40 or 50 years in the future, ``the early stages are already here,'' he argued.
As for those who argue that the sea temperature rise may only be cyclical, Welch said that the last El Nino was the strongest ever recorded and the frequency of El Nino events has increased, suggesting a broader climate change.
``What we're seeing now is unprecedented,'' agreed Barry .
WASHINGTON _ On the west coast of Canada's Hudson Bay, fewer and fewer polar bears are being born each year.
In the Maldive Islands, coral are bleaching and then dying.
And in the North Pacific, sockeye salmon seem to be losing weight.
These are a few of the signs that scientists say point to an increasingly inescapable conclusion: global warming is threatening marine life worldwide.
In a report scheduled for release Tuesday, the Redmond, Wash-based Marine Conservation Biology Institute and the World Wildlife Fund declare that ``global climate change is an additional stress on already stressed species, and may be the straw that breaks the camel's back for many types of marine life''.
The scientists did not do new research, but pulled together a variety of academic studies conducted in recent years in an effort to show a broad picture of the effects of global warming.
``The news is not good,'' said Elliott Norse, the biologist who heads the Marine Conservation Biology Institute.
``The thing that screams out here is that from the inter-tidal zone to the open ocean, from the Antarctic to the Arctic, we are seeing worrisome things everywhere that seem to be most closely correlated with climate change''.
Norse offered a variety of recent examples of the impacts of global warming, from the encroachment of subalpine firs into the alpine meadows on Mount Rainier, to the marlin caught off Longview, Wash.
, to the appearance of Pacific dolphins off the Aleutian islands.
Even the recent spate of emaciated gray whales beaching themselves along the West Coast may be attributable to global warming, he said.
In virtually every example, Norse said, species such as fish or bears or whales appear to be suffering from a lack of food that is connected to a warming of the ocean.
Polar bears, for example, seem to be suffering from a decline in the amount of sea ice, which is a source of algae that form the lowest rung on the bears' food chain.
' The report says the Alaskan salmon population declined drastically in 1997 and 1998, and that salmon that survive are unusually small, suggesting that they were starved.
The report says that sockeye are particularly susceptible to temperature variations.
``Researchers predict that anticipated increases in water temperature caused by a double of carbon dioxide will eliminate most, if not all, suitable habitat for Pacific sockeye salmon, and possibly for other salmon species as well,'' the report says.
The report was greeted skeptically by critics of global warming science.
``This doesn't surprise me, because they blame everything on global warming from tornadoes to droughts to heat waves,'' said John Carlisle, director of the environmental policy task force for The National Center for Public Policy Research, a conservative think tank.
``But there is no firm evidence that man-made global warming is even occurring.
The fact is that the Earth's temperature is naturally fluctuating''.
Frank Maisano, a spokesman for an alliance of businesses called the Global Climate Coalition, said environmentalists are too quick to use unproven theories and circumstantial evidence to bolster claims of damage from global warning.
But Norse said the evidence that global warming is harming marine life is overwhelming.
``Whether the warming we have been seeing is caused by people is unclear, but that is by far the most logical explanation for the fact that the weather is the warmest it's been for thousands of years,'' Norse said.
``The evidence is so strong, it's almost like the evidence for gravity.
The people who deny it are denying it for reasons that are not scientific or substantive, but because it goes against their beliefs or economic interests''.
Global warming is the change in the climate thought to occur because human activities add to a buildup of greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide, methane and nitrous oxide.
Those gases trap heat, and although there is ongoing dispute about how that in turn affects the climate, there is no doubt that global temperatures are rising.
According to the Environmental Protection Agency, over the past century mean global temperatures have increased 0.6 to 1.2 degrees, the global sea level has risen 4 to 10 inches, and the snow cover in the Northern Hemisphere and floating ice in the Arctic Ocean have decreased.
The 10 warmest years of this century have occurred within the past 15 years.
What to do about global warming is controversial, both in Congress and in the international policy arena.
World diplomats meeting in Bonn have been bogged down in a dispute between the United States and Europe over how to address global warming.
And the Clinton administration has yet to ask Congress to approve the Kyoto Protocol it signed in 1997, saying that it is waiting for more developing countries to sign onto the pact to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
The report also comes at a time when residents of the Northwest and the country are already spending millions of dollars and facing potential restrictions in development in order to address other factors thought to be harming Pacific salmon, such as overfishing, dams and hatcheries.
Evidence continues to accumulate that the frozen world of the Arctic and sub-Arctic is thawing, and the findings are spotlighting two increasingly important questions: Can what is happening in the Great White North touch off sudden shifts in climate that will transform weather and disrupt life throughout the Northern Hemisphere?
Is the Arctic a key to the way in which global warming might be translated into region-by-region climatic changes?
The answer, many experts believe, may depend on how much fresh water flows into the North Atlantic Ocean as a result of melting Arctic ice and the runoff from an increase in Northern Hemisphere precipitation that some scientists say is already resulting from global warming.
The theory behind this view holds that the climate of the North Atlantic region, including Europe and eastern North America, is controlled by great ocean currents that transport heat northward from the tropics.
This oceanic conveyor belt is set in motion when saltier, and therefore heavier, surface water sinks to the deep ocean in the vicinity of southern Greenland.
It is replaced by warm water from the tropics that warms the North Atlantic region.
Without it, the relatively mild climate of England, for instance, might be as cold as that of northern Canada.
The worry is that a great influx of fresh water from the thawing Arctic might dilute the salty current and so either halt or weaken the heat-bearing conveyor belt.
This could result in a sudden, long-term drop in the North Atlantic region's temperature, a climatic disruption that would probably reverberate around the hemisphere by altering large-scale atmospheric circulation.
Last week, scientists reported that the current did indeed weaken or stop at least twice in the past, plunging the region, which each time had been warming, into cold comparable to that of an ice age.
Other researchers, focusing on the present, last week produced the latest in a lengthening string of studies documenting the thawing of the vast sheet of ice that covers the far northern seas, a potential source of fresh water that, once it melts, could help weaken the heat conveyor.
A third research group, using computerized simulations of the ocean-atmosphere system, concluded that the present-day thawing of Northern Hemisphere sea ice could not be explained by natural causes.
The most obvious possible cause, they said, is global warming produced by heat-trapping waste industrial gases like carbon dioxide, which result from the burning of fossil fuels like coal, oil and natural gas.
And they said the rate of sea-ice melting was likely to increase in the decades ahead if emissions of the heat-trapping gases continued at today's rates.
Sudden influxes of fresh water from the Arctic appear to have shut down or weakened the oceanic heat conveyor twice in the relatively recent geological past, according to a study reported in the current issue of Nature by Dr.
Carsten Ruhlemann of the University of Bremen, Germany, and colleagues.
By examining chemical clues in ocean sediments, they determined that in each case, the western tropical North Atlantic was relatively warm while waters farther north were relatively cold _ as would be expected if the conveyor stopped or weakened.
The apparent shutdowns occurred as the world was coming out of the last ice age.
The North Atlantic region's rebound was twice interrupted by sudden reversions to glacial conditions, once around 15,000 years ago and again around 12,000 years ago, before settling into the relative warmth that has prevailed for the last 10,000 years.
The first reversion to glacial cold coincided with an invasion of the North Atlantic by vast quantities of fresh water in the form of icebergs, which were released from North America as temperatures warmed.
Another influx is believed to have touched off the second reversion to cold, called the Younger Dryas event.
That event set off far-flung reverberations.
The climate of the Middle East dried out so much that food became scarce, forcing the invention of agriculture, many scientists believe.
The New York region became so chilly that cold-weather trees like spruce took over the landscape from species like oak.
Could an influx of fresh water brought about by global warming make that happen again?
Recent studies lend the question new urgency.
In one, reported in the December issue of the journal Geophysical Research Letters, scientists analyzed data collected by sonar aboard nuclear submarines and found that the floating ice cover of the Arctic Ocean has become about 40 percent thinner than it was two to four decades ago.
nn In another, reported in the current issue of the journal Science, researchers led by Dr.
Ola M.
Johannessen of the Nansen Environmental and Remote Sensing Center in Bergen, Norway, used satellite data to measure the area of the Arctic ice sheet.
They found that the perennial ice cover had shrunk by 14 percent over the last two decades.
The third study, by nine researchers headed by Dr.
Konstantin Y.
Vinnikov of the University of Maryland, analyzed data from five different sources and found that sea ice in the Northern Hemisphere as a whole had decreased by about 7 percent in the last 46 years.
Computer models of the ocean-atmosphere system reconstructed this trend accurately, said Dr.
Alan Robock of Rutgers University, a member of the research team.
The model simulations also determined that the trend was much larger than what would be expected to result from the climate system's natural variability.
This assumes that the models can reproduce natural variability with some accuracy, an assumption that many experts question.
Nevertheless, Robock said, the study provides ``strong support for the theory that humans are causing the climate to change''.
If the climate is indeed warming because of human activity, many scientists say, the influx of fresh water to the North Atlantic could increase.
Melting ice in the Arctic is not the only potential contributor.
Water from melting glaciers in Greenland and other Arctic and sub-arctic islands could also contribute.
Last year, scientists reported that the southern half of the Greenland ice cap was melting back by about two cubic miles a year, enough to cover Maryland with a sheet 1 foot thick.
(Runoff from melting glaciers contributes to a rising global sea level.
Melting sea ice does not; like an ice cube in a glass of water, its change in state does not raise the water level).
A third contributor to an influx of fresh water could be increased precipitation.
A warmer atmosphere causes more water to evaporate from the oceans, and some scientists believe that some of this increased atmospheric moisture would be transported to the far north, where it would produce a heavier runoff of fresh water into the North Atlantic.
This alone, some computer models indicate, would be enough to weaken the North Atlantic heat conveyor drastically in the 21st century.
How much fresh water might be necessary to halt, slow or weaken the conveyor is a crucial question that scientists cannot yet answer.
Nor do they know how close the world might be to an abrupt change in the conveyor's behavior.
``I don't think there's any accurate assessment out there that would tell us,'' said Dr.
Peter Schlosser, a geochemist at the Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory.
If a warming atmosphere pumped enough fresh water into the ocean to shut down the conveyor, what would it mean?
Schlosser and others say the magnitude of the resulting climate change might be different from those observed in the last glacial cycle.
But, he said, ``It might put the system into a state that might be a precondition for further change''.
What might such a change entail?
Temperature and precipitation patterns could be drastically altered, much as El Nino alters them, and Schlosser says the alteration's effects would probably be felt throughout the Northern Hemisphere.
But exactly how the patterns would change and therefore what their down-to-earth effects would be, he said, is an open question.
NAIROBI, March 26 (Xinhua) --The United Nations Environment Program (UNEP) has undertaken various activities in Africa to address concerns of the continent in connection with climate variability and change, a UNEP official said Thursday.
At a press conference held here at the UNEP headquarters, Alex Alusa, program officer of UNEP atmosphere unit, said that UNEP had organized seminars to help African leaders in planning and preparing for droughts in Africa.
An ad hoc Working Group on the El Nino has been set up to review state of the science on El Nino and provide El Nino information to African countries as part of an Early Warning System, he added.
Alusa noted that UNEP is concerned with addressing two aspects of climate affecting Africa, namely the impact of climate variability on socio-economic systems and the potential impacts of climate change on eco-systems and the socio-economic system of countries.
He quoted the Second Assessment Report compiled by the Inter-Governmental Panel on Climate Change as saying that "as long as emissions (of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere) are allowed to continue in a business as usual manner, global warming will occur and occasion changes in the climate system".
The UNEP official noted that sustained increase in mean ambient temperatures beyond one centigrade degree would cause significant changes in forest and rangeland cover, species distribution, composition and migration patterns, and biome distribution.
Many organisms in the deserts are already near their tolerance limits, and some may not be able to adapt further under hotter conditions, he warned.
Alusa stressed that African continent is particularly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change because of widespread poverty, recurrent droughts, inequitable land distribution and over-dependence on rain-fed agriculture.
Although adaptation options theoretically are available, Alusa said, in practice the human, infrastructural and economic response capacity to effect timely response actions may well be beyond the economic means of some countries.
As farming depends entirely on the quality of the rainy season in most African countries, increased droughts could seriously impact the availability of food for the continent, he noted.
According to the UNEP official, a warmer environment could open up new areas for malaria and increase the incidence of yellow fever, dengue fever, onchocerciasis and trypanosomiasis.
He warned that Africa was expected to be at risk primarily from increased incidences of vector-borne diseases and reduced nutritional status.
UNEP Executive Director Klaus Topfer also addressed the press conference, saying that he was committed to making UNEP an integral voice for the environmental policy.
He disclosed that the Global Environment Facility (FEF) had given UNEP a total of 750 million U.S.
Dollars to combat forest fires in Indonesia and Brazil.
BUENOS AIRES, Argentina (AP) _ As the hurricane hunter plane swooped low over the ocean on a late October day, white caps and green foam flicked across the tropical waters, giving rise to Mitch.
Clouds grew.
Rain squalls massed.
And Tropical Depression No.
13 would become a killing machine whose 180-mph (290-kph) winds made it one of the century's strongest Atlantic hurricanes.
Reaching colossal heights, Mitch would blot out more than 10,000 lives across Central America with torrential rains, sending mudslides tumbling over villages and floodwaters to the sea.
Powerful hurricanes like Mitch, devastating droughts and torrential floods have long plagued humankind.
But a number of governments, scientists and environmentalists meeting this week at a U.N. climate summit in the Argentine capital warned there could be more extreme weather if nations don't effectively cut greenhouse gas pollutants believed to cause Earth's undue warming.
The two-week summit was expected to conclude Friday with a framework for carrying out the 1997 Kyoto treaty, which calls for reductions in heat-trapping gases by industrialized nations by 2012.
Skeptics insist there's no way to predict the weather, next week, next decade or even a century from now.
Environmentalists, too, are wary of linking any specific weather event to overall global warming.
In 1995, the U.N.-sponsored Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, where more than 2,000 scientists concluded in a landmark report that ``the balance of evidence suggests a discernible human influence on global climate''.
In other words, mankind has some hand in the Earth's warming.
Picking up their cue from the scientific evidence, climate negotiators in Buenos Aires say there is more cause for concern.
``Every month so far this year has set a record high for global temperatures, right on the heels of 1997, the warmest year on the books.
And a powerful El Nino gave us a taste of the extreme weather we can expect from global warming: droughts and floods in Texas, drought-driven fires in Indonesia, Florida and Mexico, and devastating floods in China,'' said Stuart Eizenstat, the top U.S. climate negotiator.
Others reject that the globe is warming, and challenge the consensus that unfettered burning of coal, gas and oil will harm the Earth.
As the debate continues, record amounts of gases spew from power plants and cars.
New research shows that temperature changes can change more rapidly than previously thought, says Jeff Severinghause of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography in San Diego.
``We now have evidence that at the end of the last ice age, the climate warmed abruptly in less than 10 years,'' he said, reporting findings from 100-pound (45-kilo) samples extracted from Greenland's ice pack.
He said evidence suggests a rapid change 11,600 years ago, when temperatures rose about 14 degrees F (8 degrees C) in a mere decade or two.
He has documented at least one other sudden shift.
One U.S. atmospheric scientist, John R.
Christy at the University of Alabama, contends satellite and balloon data show significant global warming is not occuring now.
He has also argued that trying to discern patterns in ``extreme'' weather events is misleading.
And hurricane forecasters doubt extreme weather events such as Mitch show the influence of global warming.
``I think it's agreed that the globe is about 1 degree Fahrenheit warmer this century, but as far as its effect on tropical cyclones, we haven't been able to notice any difference,'' said forecaster Brian Jarvinen at the U.S.
National Hurricane Center in Miami.
He said intense hurricane periods have cycled on and off roughly every 25 years in this century.
``You had intense storms in the 1920s, 30s and 40s,'' he said, but then a milder hurricane cycle from the 60s to the 80s.
Some governments warn they can't wait for a definitive answer to why the oceans are rising.
Seas have risen 2 centimeters (nearly 1 inch) in the past year in parts of the Pacific, shrinking shorelines and displacing coastal dwellers _ all blamed on global warming.
The prime minister of Tuvalu said his nation of 9,600 people _ spread over nine small South Pacific atolls, has already suffered.
``We are the most vulnerable of the vulnerable countries,'' said Bikenibeau Paeniu.
``We are spending millions of dollars to rehabilitate the devastation caused by the adverse effects of climate change''.
As for global warming, he added his islands average just 2 meters (6 feet) above sea level, and global warming is ``not a matter of economics and politics, but of life and death.''
WASHINGTON, November 3 (Xinhua) --Long-term climate change such as global warming could have major impacts on human health, the environment, the economy and society, said Dr.
James Baker, Director of U.S.
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
Writing in the Washington Post Monday when the Fourth Session of the Conference of the Parties to U.N.
Framework Convention on Climate Change begins in Buenos Aires, the U.S. scientist said that global warming chould affect everything from energy use and transportation to water resource management and agriculture to international trade and development.
Baker said that over the past century, greenhouse gases have increased steadly: fossil fuel combustion now accounts for about 85 percent of U.S. greenhouse gas emissions.
At the same time, agriculture, changing land-use patterns and deforestation are playing a significant role in altering the atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases.
Since 1860, the atmospheric concentration of carbon dioxide has increased by 30 percent.
Overall emissions of greenhouse gases have been growing at about 1 percent each year, he said.
On the risks of a warmer world, Baker said that a relatively small change in mean global temperature can lead to a large change in extreme events.
This year's El Nino has increased rainfall, flooding and droughts.
Increased duration and frequency of heat waves would heighten mortality rates, and the potential for transmitting serious infectious diseases would be increased, Baker said.
According to a scientific assessment, the globally averaged temperature will increase about 2 to 6 degrees by the year 2100.
The related rise in sea level will be about 6 to 37 inches.
With 50 percent of the U.S. population and 50 to 70 percent of the global population currently living in coastal areas, future sea level rises, alterations in storm patterns and higher storm surges could have devastating effects.
Even with current global populations, a 20-inch rise in the sea level without adaptive measures would directly threaten 92 million people, wrote Director Baker.
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20003 Tel: 202-547-4512 Fax: 202-546-4194 COPYRIGHT 1998 BY WORLDSOURCES, INC.
, A JOINT VENTURE OF FDCH, INC.
AND WORLD TIMES, INC.
NO PORTION OF THE MATERIALS CONTAINED HEREIN MAY BE USED IN ANY MEDIA WITHOUT ATTRIBUTION TO WORLDSOURCES, INC.
Greenhouse gas emissions - blamed for global warming - may cause the collapse of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet and raise the average global sea level by four to six metres, beginning as early as the next century, a new scientific study predicted recently.
Using recent technological advances in climate modelling and new scientific research on ice and oceans, Michael Oppenheimer, chief scientist at the New York-based Environmental Defense Fund, made three predictions on the impact of climate change on the Antarctic Ice Sheet.
In two of the three scenarios, complete melting would raise global sea level by an average four to six metres, causing major coastal flooding worldwide, Oppenheimer wrote in the latest issue of the scientific journal Nature'.
In the other scenario, the internal ice shifting within the ice sheet could cause the melting to slow down.
With its 3.8 million cubic kilometers of ice at the South Pole, the West Antarctic Ice Sheet posed the 'most immediate threat of a large sea-level rise, owing to its potential instability,'' Oppenheimer said.
Changes in ocean temperature and circulation expected to accompany global warming could disintegrate the large ice sheet, as early as next century, he said.
The West Antarctic Ice Sheet first attracted widespread attention 30 years ago when scientists suggested that global warming caused by greenhouse gases might cause its disintegration.
Greenhouse gas emissions - including carbon dioxide created by the burning of coal, gas and oil, are believed by most atmospheric scientists to cause the warming of the Earth's surface and a change in the global climate.
In 1995 an international panel of scientists that advises the United Nations on the issue, predicted that the average global temperatures could heat up between one and 3.5 degrees Celsius during the next century.
Last year, scientists declared 1997 the warmest year on record, and the fact that nine of the past 11 years set new records for warm temperatures bolstered the view that greenhouse emissions were raising the average temperature.
Over time, these increases could cause changes in climate, including the increased frequency and intensity of storms, floods, heat waves, and droughts, the scientists said.
To deal with this threat 38 industrialised countries agreed at a conference last December in Kyoto, Japan to reduce their emissions of six greenhouse gases by about six percent overall between 2008 and 2012.
While countries work out the details of the Kyoto agreement, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change stated that the lack of scientific understanding of the effects of global warming on the West Antarctic Ice Sheet limits the ability to predict the risk of the collapse' or melting'.
But Oppenheimer warned that, as countries begin to formulate global warming policies, 'the potential hazards from the collapse of the ice sheet is too large and irreversible'' to be considered at a later date.
Conflicting scientific views on the effect global warming would have on ice caps had confused the issue, Oppenheimer said.
Until recently, scientific studies argued that the West Ice Sheet and Antarctica as a whole were growing not disintegrating or melting.
Similarly the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change estimated that over the past century Antarctica did not cause sea-levels to rise at all.
Yet, recent studies had found high melting rates under the floating ice, he added.
In combination with other findings of shrinking icebergs, these new melting rates exceeded the estimated growth of the ice in the West Antarctic Ice Sheet.
Oppenheimer pointed to studies made of two ice shelves to the north of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet that had been disintegrating for several decades, possibly because of local atmospheric warming.
While most scientists agreed that the ice sheet was shrinking, they disagreed on how fast it will melt and what the consequences would be.
In an effort to simplify the controversy, Oppenheimer produced what he believed would be the three most probable effects of global warming on this relatively unstable sheet of ice.
Each of the three most likely possibilities varied according to how fast the West Antarctic Ice Sheet responded to the melting and disintegration of various glaciers and ice shelves in the area.
Using the climate change predictions of the Intergovernmental Panel and the continued growth in greenhouse gas emissions, Oppenheimer predicted that in two of the possible scenarios sea levels would rise four to six metres.
While most of the sea-level increase would occur beyond the twenty-first century for several hundreds of years, the process could begin in as early as 50 years.
Some reports said the process already had begun.
In the other scenario, Oppenheimer believed that internal ice shifting within the ice sheet possibly could cause the melting to slow down.
WASHINGTON, September 30 (Xinhua) --Some 1,000 world senior scientists at a summit here today called on world leaders to act immediately to prevent the potentially devastating consequences of human-induced global warming.
A consensus declaration "World Scientists' Call for Action at Kyoto," signed by more than 1,500 scientists, was presented to the U.S. government at the Summit on Climate Change in Washington, DC.
"Let there be no doubt about the conclusions of the scientific community: the threat of global warming is very real and action is needed immediately," said Nobel laureate Henry Kendall, chairman of the Union of Concerned Scientists.
"It is a grave error to believe that we can continue to procrastinate".
Leading scientists came to the Science Summit to urge world leaders at their Kyoto Climate Summit in Japan in December to negotiate final agreement on a treaty to reduce emissions of carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping gases that are altering the climate.
The scientists meeting today was held six days before a White House conference to propose global actions on the issue.
The scientists' declaration urged all government leaders to demonstrate a new commitment to protecting the global environment for future generations.
The declaration stated that global warming is underway and the overuse of fossil fuels is partly to blame.
It said that climate change is projected to raise sea levels; increase the likelihood of more intense rainfall, floods, and droughts; and endanger human health by greater exposure to heat waves and encroachment of tropical diseases to higher latitudes.
Further, the declaration said, climate change is likely to exacerbate food shortages and spread undernutrition by adversely affecting water supplies, soil conditions, temperature tolerances, and growing seasons.
Climate change will also accelerate the appalling pace at which species are now disappearing, especially in vulnerable ecosystems, it said, adding that possibly one-third of all species may be lost before the end of the next century.
According to the Union of Concerned Scientists, the atmospheric concentration of carbon dioxide has increased by 30 percent since preindustrial times.
Over the same period, atmospheric methane has risen by 145 percent, mostly from agricultural activities like growing rice and raising cattle.
As a result, the earth's average surface temperature will increase by 1.0-3.5 degrees Celsius in the next 100 years, in addition to the increase of 0.3-0.6 degrees Celsius that has already occurred since 1860.
Scientists predict that even if people stopped emitting heat-trapping gases now, the climate wouldn't stabilize for many decades because of the gases have already been sent into the atmosphere.
They hold that a strong treaty will be the "first step to protect future generations from dire prospects that would result from failure to meet our responsibilities toward them".
This is a wake-up call for world leaders.
Never before has the senior scientific community spoken so boldly on the urgent need to prevent disruption to our climate," said Nobel laureate Dudley Herschbath, professor of chemistry at Harvard University.
BUENOS AIRES, October 30 (Xinhua) --The World Wildlife Fund (WWF) and the Wildlife Foundation of Argentina (WFA) on Friday called for the saving of forests and jungles, which are in danger because of the climate change.
The WWF and WFA experts told the press here that all the measures to increase the energy efficiency must be taken and less contaminating sources of energy should be used as a final solution to the problem.
All the countries, especially the industrialized ones, must commit themselves to take more stringent measures to reduce their carbon dioxide emissions, they added.
The press conference was attended by Nigel Dudley, WWF independent consultant, and WFA Director Javier Corcuera.
Dudley said that the climate change or global warming up threatens the wellbeing of all mankind, and that the climate change impacts are more evident every day in all the world.
He said there exist possibilities of the destroying of the forests, because they cannot follow the rhythm of the rapid climate change.
The WWF, the biggest organization in the world for the conservation of nature, has 4.7 million employees who work in 96 countries in the world.
The organization also has a status of official observer in the United Nations.
The Fourth World Conference on the Climate Change will be held here from November 2 to 13.
GENEVA (AP) --Cities including New York and Tokyo may face flooding; large swathes of Latin America will suffer from drought and Australia's Great Barrier Reef may be destroyed unless more is done to stop global warming, the World Wildlife Fund for Nature warned Tuesday.
The environmental group urged governments meeting in Germany next week to honor earlier pledges to cut emissions of carbon dioxide --one of the main greenhouse gases -- by implementing tough energy-saving policies.
``Evidence for the warming of our planet over the last 200 years is now overwhelming,'' said a WWF statement.
``With no action to curb emissions, the climate on earth over the next century could become warmer than any the human species has lived through''.
It said China's Giant Panda and the Arctic polar bear were among the species at risk of extinction from global warming.
WWF commissioned the Climatic Research Unit at Britain's University of East Anglia to conduct research into various climate change scenarios over the next few decades.
It projected that sea levels would rise between three-quarters of an inch to four inches per decade.
This would threaten low-lying U.S. coastal cities such as New York, Boston, Baltimore and Miami with flooding.
The Japanese cities of Tokyo and Osaka --among others -- would also be at risk, it said.
Large areas of the Amazon would become more susceptible to forest fires.
Drought would also likely affect Argentina, southern Mexico and Central America.
Rising sea temperatures by 2010 threatened the very survival of the Australian Great Barrier Reef.
Scientists generally agree that temperatures are rising --with 1998 being the warmest year on record.
But there is no consensus on how much man is to blame.
``Although the precise contribution of human activities to global warming cannot yet be stated with confidence, it is clear the planet would not be warming as rapidly if humans were not currently emitting about 6.8 billion tons of carbon into the atmosphere each year,'' said the WWF report.
Under a 1997 agreement reached in the Japanese city of Kyoto, industrialized nations agreed to reduce their carbon dioxide emissions by five percent between 2008 and 2012.
Representatives from 150 countries meet later this month in Bonn to work on ways of implementing the Kyoto deal prior to a November 2000 meeting in the Netherlands.
While President Clinton signed the Kyoto agreement, he has not sought its ratification because of widespread opposition in the Senate.
Critics say it will cost too much to implement while developing countries will be allowed to let greenhouse emissions grow.
As Earth grows warmer, the prognosis for human health is darkening.
Skeptics still dismiss the doomsday scenarios of the so-called greenhouse effect.
But momentum is building for those scientists who contend that the time has come to investigate how global warming may hurt, not whether it's real.
Heat stress deaths in the United States may double by 2075, one researcher estimates.
More Americans will wheeze from pollution, sneeze from pollen and grow ill from contaminated water, according to some projections.
Recent studies showed that abnormal rainfalls boosted mice populations and likely sparked the 1993 hantavirus outbreak near Albuquerque, N.M., suggesting that climate shifts pose infectious disease threats in the United States.
The forecast is worse for those living beyond U.S. borders, where diseases may hitchhike on bugs thriving in the heat and epidemics may wash ashore on ocean plants blooming in warm water.
``It's happening right now,'' said Paul Epstein, associate director of the Center for Health and Global Environment at Harvard University's Medical School, who is among the most pessimistic of researchers.
``Glaciers are retreating, plants are migrating.
We're seeing West Nile virus in New York, dengue and malaria in northern India''.
The warming phenomenon is widely blamed on the atmospheric build-up of ``greenhouse gases'' such as carbon dioxide, which are emitted during the burning of coal and other fossil fuels.
The gases trap heat, upsetting climate systems, many experts maintain.
The consequences to health are viewed through the lens of probability.
Rising temperatures, heavier rains and longer droughts would shake up ecological systems that influence human well-being.
Prolonged rains, for example, might cause new plant growth that would attract deer, which can carry ticks, which can carry Lyme disease.
Drought may slow rivers, creating stagnant pools for mosquito breeding.
The possibilities are riveting to specialists across the sciences, from experts in plant migration to researchers who peek inside polar ice cores for clues about prehistoric climate.
At least two groups of scientists are tracking possible health threats.
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, assembled by the United Nations, has concluded that ``significant loss of life'' is possible.
Dengue, rift valley fever, cholera and other diseases may spread in parts of Africa, Asia and Latin America, the IPCC reports.
The portion of the world population vulnerable to malaria may rise to 60 percent from 45 percent by 2100, according to the IPCC.
A group of U.S. scientists, meanwhile, is updating a report to Congress that will outline domestic threats from hotter air and oceans.
The resulting climate shifts would drench some regions in more intense and frequent rain, while others areas would get baked by drought, these scientists say.
The group recently warned that warmer air will increase ground-level ozone pollution, aggravating asthma and other breathing problems, plus increase allergy woes in areas where plants flourish.
The report, the health segment of the U.S.
National Assessment of the Potential Consequences of Climate Variability and Change, also warns that more people could get sick from contaminated water.
Floods may cause overflows at sewage treatment plants.
The specific impact will depend on a person's age and overall health, scientists said.
``With heat waves, it's the elderly,'' said Jonathan Patz, director of Johns Hopkins University's Program on Health Effects of Global Environmental Change and a lead author of the U.S. assessment.
``With air pollution, if ozone increases, it's people with respiratory problems''.
Laurence Kalkstein, director of the Center for Climatic Research at the University of Delaware, predicted that heat stress fatalities will double in the next 75 years if warming trends and other conditions persist.
About 2,000 to 3,000 Americans die each year from heat stress, he said.
Fatalities will be most common in cities in the Northeast and Midwest, where residents are unaccustomed to extreme, enduring heat, and where many people live in brick houses with tar roofs.
But people living in established hot spots may suffer, too.
``Let's assume it gets up to 120 or 125 degrees relatively regularly'' in Phoenix, Kalkstein said.
``You may get to the point where the heat just becomes intolerable''.
All the projections come with caveats.
For instance, other factors may prove more important than global warming in the spread of disease.
Expansions in worldwide travel and trade will be responsible for some epidemics.
So will weak sanitation, water and medical systems.
``A major problem is population growth,'' said Dr.
Donald Henderson, an epidemiologist at Johns Hopkins.
``Urban areas are growing at very rapid rates.
People in tropical areas are living in crowded areas with poor sanitation.
All these factors could allow an organism to grow, but they have nothing to do with global warming''.
Forecasts also are clouded by the limits of science.
Researchers cannot say, for example, exactly when and where disease will strike, or how severely.
Nor is it known how vaccines, more air conditioning or other measures will insulate people from illnesses.
But the worldwide climate has changed significantly, most scientists concur.
Air temperatures have risen between 0.7 and 1.4 degrees in the past 100 years, and new data show ocean warming down to depths of nearly 10,000 feet.
Palpable symptoms are emerging.
Global icecaps are melting.
Insects are migrating to higher elevations, and shrubs are taking root on the Alaskan tundra.
The scientific understanding of what role climate plays in health, meanwhile, is growing.
In Uganda, torrential rains have been blamed for malaria deaths.
A new study of more than 400 gastrointestinal disease outbreaks across the U.S. estimates that runoffs from heavy rains carried the bacteria one-third of the time.
``It is indeed an emerging science,'' said Rita Colwell, director of the National Science Foundation.
``Will we have cholera in the U.S.?
I doubt it.
Will we have more severe events in Bangladesh?
Possibly''. But most scientists say it's too early to confirm links between current human sickness and global warming.
Predictions that reach beyond the proof of science risk the label of irresponsibility.
``There are many, many reasons why malaria has gone higher in recent years,'' said Paul Reiter, a national Centers for Disease Control and Prevention specialist who has studied mosquitos at higher elevations.
``But none of them have been attributed to climate change.
It's just make-believe''.
Some scientists are guilty of oversimplification, said Hadi Dowlatabadi, director of the Integrated Study of the Human Dimensions of Global Change at Carnegie Mellon University.
If warming temperatures were such a powerful bridge to disease, Dowlatabadi asks, why did malaria epidemics sweep through England and other chilly locales in previous generations?
Missing from current projections, he said, are adequate emphases on public health factors.
Between 1995 and 1998, for instance, 50,000 people in northern Mexico fell sick by dengue fever, the mosquito-born disease that can cause fever, headaches and internal bleeding.
Only 50 people in nearby Texas, meanwhile, were stricken, Dowlatabadi said.
``You tell me: Does the climate change dramatically as you go the five miles over the Rio Grande''? he asked.
Researchers on the U.S.
Assessment team, while giving weight to such arguments, say they miss the larger point: With global climate shifting, risk is rising.
``There's not complete agreement on all the particulars,'' said Harvard's Epstein.
``But there is a clear consensus that climate plays a role in infectious diseases, and that climate change, with more warming and more extreme events, will have a negative impact on public health in multiple ways''.
(OPTIONAL TRIM FOLLOWS) Researchers scratching away at the question said they've found a helpful tool in a familiar weather phenomenon: El Nino.
El Nino events, the natural climate cycles that cause regional temperature extremes, rainfalls and droughts, may be useful dress rehearsals for more permanent shifts.
``To the extent that El Nino can give you a short window into long-term events, it's a valid way to look at things,'' said Dr.
Brian Hjelle, a New Mexico scientist.
Hjelle is among researchers who have examined recent outbreaks of hantavirus, the illness that has killed dozens in New Mexico and other Southwest states in recent years.
When people became sick with flu-like symptoms in 1993, the cause was a mystery.
The afflicted got fevers, aches and chills.
Next came headaches, nausea and lungs filling with fluid.
Forty died.
Around-the-clock investigation blamed the white-bellied deer mouse, whose urine can carry the virus.
Seven years later, scientists maintain a climate shift was at work.
The deer mouse population boomed prior to the outbreak, according to a study authored by Hjelle, because El Nino-driven rains in 1991-92 increased vegetation, providing food and ground cover.
When conditions turned drier the next year, the mice sought food in homes.
Scientists said they're now refining the technique of using ``climate signals'' to prepare for health problems.
In East Africa, ocean temperatures and mountain greenery can be used to predict outbreaks of Rift Valley Fever, a disease that causes partial blindness in humans and forces pregnant livestock to abort fetuses.
And in the Bay of Bengal off Bangladesh, satellite imagery has shown that higher water temperatures cause plankton blooms that carry cholera epidemics.
``We really think we've made the linkage between climate variability, ecology and human health,'' said Patz, from Johns Hopkins.
``And this is where we need to go'' to understand risks.
GENEVA, July 9 (Xinhua) --Climate change is likely to disturb various natural and ecological systems, posing serious threat to human health, said a report jointly released Tuesday by relevant United Nations specialized agencies at a session on global warming issue.
"In destablizing the world's climate and its dependent ecosystems, we are posing new and widespread risks to human health", said the report, which assesses potential health consequences of human-induced climate change, while conceding that much more research needs to be done.
The pace of climate change is predicted to be unprecedentedly quick due to the accumulation in atmosphere of greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide.
The least direct health effects would be those due to socioeconomic disruption caused by environmental deterioration, the most direct would be those caused by heatwaves, storms and floods.
The extreme weather events may be more frequent and severe as the climate is getting warmer and wetter.
Experts predict a 1-3 centigrade degree growth in global mean surface temperature by the year 2100, and that we would have higher sea level, more heavy rainfalls, more floods, more bushfires, as well as longer and more severe droughts.
Hot weather would lead to up to several thousand extra heat-related deaths annually by around 2050 in many big cities worldwide.
The increase would outweigh the decline in winter-related mortality.
The report said that many of the indirect public health effects due to climate change would occur slowly, via climate impacts upon agriculture, ocean fisheries and infectious disease transmission.
Climate change allows disease vectors to extend territory, helping infectious diseases spread and kill more people.
In the next century, it would increase the global incidence of malaria by 50 to 80 million additional cases annually, and the vulnerable population would rise from the current 45 percent to about 60 percent of the world's total.
The incidence of food-and water-related infections such as cholera would also grow, particularly in tropical and sub-tropical regions, following changes in water distribution, temperature and the proliferation of microorganisms, the report added.
According to the report, by exacerbating the production of some types of air pollutants, climate change would result in the increase in the incidence of related health problems, such as cardio-vascular and respiratory disorders.
In some regions, warmer and wetter climate could also lead to higher concentration in air of various pollens and spores with a possible impact on allergic disorders, such as hay fever and asthma.
Sustained stratospheric ozone depletion --a factor closely related to climate change, which leads to increased exposure to ultraviolet radiation, would cause increased cases of skin cancer, and possibly of ocular lesions, such as cataracts.
It may also impair human immune system, said the report, which was released at the July 8-19 session in Geneva of the Conference of the Parties of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change.
OTTAWA, April 18 (Xinhua) --The Arctic town of Sachs Harbour in Canada on the west coast of Banks Island is slowly sinking into the sea as a result of global warming, the National Post reported Tuesday.
Climate change in the past decade has brought milder winters, warmer summers and a later freeze-up to soften the permafrost that supports the Arctic town.
Rosemarie Kuptana, an Inuit leader, was quoted as saying the situation has made it difficult for hunters to travel over an increasingly muddy landscape.
"If this rate of change continues, our lifestyle may forever change because our communities are sinking with the melting permafrost," she said.
Kuptana is leading an international project to collect Inuit observations about climate change in her hometown of Sachs Harbour.
In the northwest reaches of the Arctic, she said that experienced hunters have fallen through unusually thin ice.
The region is also seeing the appearance of species such as robins, barn swallows, beetles and sandflies.
Some of the Inuit locals have begun to suffer allergies from white pine pollen, which has never before reached Banks Island.
She urged more attention to the issue of global warming, saying, "What happens in the Arctic environment is what is in store for other regions of the world."
MONTREAL, October 16 (Xinhua) --The World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) today called for stronger actions to combat the threat of climate change to wildlife and natural ecosystems.
"Climate change as a result of global warming represents a serious threat to the survival of biodiversity and the protection, management and rehabilitation of protected areas," the WWF reaffirmed.
Governments and international organizations "have to stop hitting the snooze button on the alarm bell for action that global warming represents," said Adam Markham, director of the WWF's Global Climate Change Campaign.
"How many ecosystems must be threatened before we listen to this wake-up call"? he asked at a news briefing at the ongoing World Conservation Congress in Montreal, Canada.
Climate changes affecting the planet are caused mainly by the burning of coal, oil and gas.
Huge quantities of pollutants like carbon dioxide trap more and more heat in the atmosphere, ultimately disrupting the global temperature balance.
At the speed the climate is now changing, scientists predict the world will soon be warmer than at any time in the last 10,000 years.
According to a study by some 2,500 scientists of the world, atmospheric concentrations of Co2 are now 30 percent above the pre-industrial level and a warming trend in global mean temperature can be detected since 1860.
"Significant loss of species must be considered as one of the most important impacts of climate change," the study said.
Climate change is "getting worse," and it has already produced "severe" impacts on ecosystems, habitats, species, Markham noted.
In this fight against global warming, Markham emphasized that the industrialized countries should take on more responsibilities and keep their promises of Co2 emission reductions.
He singled out the United States, the world's biggest producer of green house gas emission, and Canada, the No.
1 country in per capita gas emission.
The two countries produce more than 20 percent of all gas emission worldwide, he said.
If the present level of ecosystem is to be maintained, at least 20 percent of Co2 emission will have to be reduced worldwide, Markham added.
BEIRUT, November 14 (Xinhua) --Global warming weather will critically undermine efforts for sustainable development in Lebanon and other Mediterranean literal states, the Greenpeace Mediterranean has said in a report.
Daily Star today quoted a report issued by Greenpeace Mediterranean in Lebanon on Thursday entitled "Climate change and the Mediterranean region" as saying that climate change will add to existing problems of desertification, water scarcity, and food production in the region.
As the world warms, global sea levels will rise as oceans expand.
The level of much of the Mediterranean could rise by close to one meter by 2100, the report said.
According to the report, the worst affected areas will be the Nile Delta in Egypt, Venice in Italy and Thessaloniki in Greece as a consequence of the expected rise in sea level.
It said that the first impact of climate change will be felt in the Mediterranean water resource system.
Reductions in water availability would hit southern Mediterranean countries the hardest.
In Egypt, Libya, Tunisia, Algeria, Morocco, Syria, Malta and Lebanon, water availability is already near the 1,000 cubic meters per person per year benchmark for water scarcity, and the report warns that live-stock production would suffer as rangeland deteriorates.
The 55-page report added that rising carbon dioxide (CO2) will also introduce new threats to human health, ecosystems and national economies.
As a result of carbon dioxide emissions, the frequency and severity of drought could increase across the region.
Temperatures could rise by over four degrees centigrade by 2100 over many of the inland areas and by more than this over the Mediterranean Sea.
The report called on all Mediterranean states to immediately demand industrialized countries adopt legally-binding obligations at the Kyoto Climate Conference in Japan next month to reduce carbon dioxide emissions by 20 percent over 1990 levels by 2005.
WASHINGTON, June 13 (Xinhua) --Global warming in the 21st century will likely cause drastic changes in the climate of the United States, including potentially severe droughts, increased risk of flood, mass migrations of species, and widespread erosion of coastal zones, a new federal report released this week says.
The report, Climate Change Impacts on the United States: The Potential Consequences of Climate Variability and Change, provides the most detailed look ever at the possible impacts of global warming on the United States over the next 100 years.
Among its key findings, the report indicates that continued growth in worldwide emissions is likely to increase average temperatures across the United States by 5-10 degrees Fahrenheit by 2100.
Impacts such as heavier precipitation and increased drought will vary widely from region to region, and some natural ecosystems, such as alpine meadows, coral reefs, coastal wetlands and Alaskan permafrost, are likely to deteriorate further and some may disappear entirely, says the report.
Changes in rain and snowfall patterns could affect the availability of fresh water, and crop productivity is likely to rise nationally due to the fertilizing effect of more carbon dioxide in the air, although regional cropping patterns may change significantly.
Yet "for the nation as a whole, direct economic impacts are likely to be modest," concludes the report, which is based on computer models and historical data, and "American society would likely be able to adapt to most of the impacts".
The program was authorized by Congress in 1990 and carried out by nine federal agencies.
The analysis was based largely on two computer simulations of future climate that often produce very different or even antithetical results.
BEIJING, November 21 (Xinhua) --Experts attending the '97 China International Environmental Forum warn that failure to limit greeenhouse gas emissions will raise the global mean surface temperature by two degrees centigrades over the next 100 years.
This will in turn raise the sea level by some 50 cm.
, according to Raul Estrada Oyuela, chairman of Ad Hoc Group Berlin Mandate under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
He added that many island states will disappear by then.
People threatened by storms and floods will be forced to migrate, and climate changes will aggravate risks of famine and disease, said Oyuela.
He cited a recent report by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change which noted that stablization of the concentration of greenhouse gases by the year 2100 will nonetheless be accompanied by rising temperatures and higher sea levels.
Zou Jingmeng, former chairman of the World Meteorological Organization, stressed that further proof is needed to verify the prediction, but noted that people must pay great attention to the possibility of any increase in the global surface temperature.
Experts say the concentration of greenhouse gases, including carbon dioxide, methane and nitrous oxides, in the atmosphere will continue to rise due to the use of coal, petroleum, fertilizer and excessive deforestation.
Oyuela said the global mean surface temperature over the past one hundred years has climbed by 0.6 centigrades, with a rise in the sea level of between 10-25 centimeters.
He said that a 50 cm rise in the sea level will increase the number of people under the threat of flooding from the current 46 million to 92 million annually.
Climate changes will also increase the risk of heart disease, pulmonary tuberculosis, and other infectious diseases in the subtropical and tropical areas, according to experts.
An international climate conference scheduled for next month in Kyoto, Japan, will focus on greenhouse gas emissions.
SAN FRANCISCO _ Like an omen from the Book of Revelation, a wispy, silvery-blue noctilucent cloud hovered over Colorado late last month.
The timing couldn't have been more appropriate.
The cloud _ a harbinger of climate change, some call it _ appears as global warming research is becoming a major scientific industry in fields ranging from atmospheric physics to biology.
Researchers are increasingly convinced that carbon dioxide gas from the burning of fossil fuels is at least partly responsible for the marked warming of recent years.
And the warming is accelerating.
``Almost every climate model says the same thing,'' said ocean chemist Peter G.
Brewer of the Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute in Monterey.
``In the next decade, we might see the same amount of warming that we saw over the last century''.
In the diverse world of global warming research, the latest projections suggest that: _ Coastal residents can look for rainier weather, and sea levels could rise one to three feet around North America.
Heavier rain and higher seas would increase coastal damage during storms.
_ The Pacific ecosystem, especially fish that benefit much of the West Coast economy, could be threatened.
``There's lots of data showing there are big changes in marine ecosystems from the tropics to the poles,'' said biological oceanographer James P.
Barry of the Monterey Bay Institute.
For example, ``if you look at the record from 1992 to now, there's just been a precipitous decline in salmon stocks _ they're smaller and have less fat''.
&QL; _ An ominous absence of icebergs in the Grand Banks shipping lanes off Newfoundland might be an early warning sign of global warming, Science magazine reported July 2.
_ New York City will suffer repeated flooding in the next century as global warming raises the sea level, soaking subways and turning parts of Brooklyn into wetlands, said a report issued jointly on June 29 by the Environmental Defense Fund and Columbia University.
Global warming might seem like an unreal issue to residents of Northern California: They are shivering through one of the chillier summers in long memory.
Still, such short-term coolings can't obscure the long-term signal that it is getting warmer all over the Earth.
New projections of global warming indicate it might be even slightly worse than originally foreseen.
Previously, scientists expected an average planetary temperature rise of 1.4 to 6.3 degrees Fahrenheit over the next 100 years.
Now they're looking at a rise of 2.3 to 7.2 degrees, said Tom Wigley, a climatologist at the National Center for Atmospheric Research in Boulder, Colo.
That 1-degree difference in projections might seem slight, but it equals the increase in average global temperature over the last century, Wigley said.
One reason for the worsened climate projections is the increased success in controlling another pollutant: sulfur dioxide.
While carbon dioxide warms the atmosphere, sulfur dioxide cools it.
Until recently, researchers hoped that sulfur dioxide would counterbalance global warming.
Now that hope is fading as nations establish tighter controls on sulfur dioxide emissions, Wigley said.
For that reason, slightly higher rates of warming and sea level rise related to warming are expected, according to a climate study written by Wigley and released June 29 by the Pew Center on Global Climate Change in Washington.
In the next century, the rates of rise in temperature and sea level might occur up to seven times as fast as in the 20th century, the Pew study adds.
Computer models have indicated that global warming in the lower atmosphere would be accompanied by high-altitude cooling.
In 1994, professor Gary Thomas of the University of Colorado at Boulder forecast that as the upper air cooled, beautiful noctilucent clouds _ common in polar latitudes _ would appear at southerly latitudes.
The clouds are wispy and silvery-blue, composed of very small ice crystals.
They resemble cirrus clouds, but are far higher, some 50 miles up.
&QL; On June 22, 50 miles in the sky over Boulder, a silver-bluish noctilucent cloud drifted overhead.
It is the farthest south such a cloud has been recorded, Thomas said.
The southerly drift of noctilucent clouds may be the miner's canary of global warming, a signal of bad times ahead.
``What we're seeing are some dramatic effects that are far greater than what the models are predicting'' he said.
Yet the national response to global warming remains sluggish and divided, in part because of fears that tough pollution-control measures could hurt a vibrant economy.
``We are astonished that some members of Congress continue to ignore warnings from the scientific community,'' said Walt Oechel, a biology professor and director of the Global Climate Change Research Group at San Diego State University.
``Climate scientists from around the world are in wide agreement that global warming is real and could greatly disrupt society.''
LONDON (AP) --Global warming could fundamentally transform a third of the world's plant and animal habitats by the end of this century, threatening many species with rapid extinction, an international conservation organization warned Wednesday.
In a new report, researchers for the World Wide Fund for Nature --known as the World Wildlife Fund in the United States and Canada -- singled out the Arctic and northern latitudes as the most vulnerable to the changing climate.
They estimated 20 percent of the species there could die out due to shrinking habitat.
The report raises the specter of a tundra denuded of its walrus and polar bear populations and a New England stripped of its spruce and fir forests if the amount of carbon dioxide pumped into the atmosphere is not reduced.
Many scientists believe that high concentrations of CO2 and other so-called greenhouse gases trap the sun's heat in the atmosphere, driving up temperatures and changing weather patterns.
''As global warming accelerates, plants and animals will come under increasing pressure to migrate to find suitable habitat,'' said the report's co-author, Adam Markham, executive director of the U.S.-based group Clean Air-Cool Planet.
''Some will just not be able to move fast enough,'' Markham said.
The northern latitudes of Canada, Russia and Scandinavia, where climate change is expected to occur fastest, could lose 70 percent of their habitat --a level that rises to 82 percent for Iceland.
In several countries --including Russia, Sweden, Finland, Estonia, Latvia, Iceland, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Georgia -- and in seven Canadian provinces and territories, more than half the existing habitat is at risk, the report said.
More than a third of habitat is in danger in the U.S. states of Maine, New Hampshire, Oregon, Colorado, Wyoming, Idaho, Utah, Arizona, Kansas, Oklahoma and Texas, it said.
The projected habitat changes and species extinctions would not be limited to northern latitudes, however.
Coastal and island areas would be at risk from warming oceans and rising waters, the report said.
The exact nature and rate of global climate change remains contentious.
According to a study published in the July issue of the Dutch journal Climate Change, Arctic temperatures in the late 20th century were the warmest in four centuries.
But, critics of the global warming theory argue there's little evidence that forces other than natural temperature swings are at work.
They have also argued that while ground monitors have shown a sharp increase in Earth's temperatures, satellite and weather balloon observations have shown little or no warming --a discrepancy that has still not been fully explained.
Researchers evaluated data from 100 separate studies of environmental factors in North America, Europe and Asia, including air temperature measurements, air circulation, precipitation, sea ice, glaciers and plant growth.
They said parts of Alaska and Eurasia had warmed ''alarmingly'' --by as much as 11 degrees -- during winter months during the last 30 years.
''This compilation of research results make it undeniable that a major warming is affecting the Arctic environment,'' said Michael T.
Ledbetter of the National Science Foundation in Washington, which funded the study, co-authored by 11 climatologists from five universities in the United States.
Wednesday's report --written by Markham and University of Toronto professor Jay Malcolm -- used computer models to simulate global climate and vegetation change under a variety of conditions.
Its projections are based on the concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere doubling from pre-industrial levels by the year 2100.
And even that estimate is optimistic, the report said.
Current concentrations of carbon dioxide --the gas primarily responsible for global warming -- are about 30 percent higher than pre-industrial levels, and could hit double the pre-industrial level by 2050, the researchers said.
The loss of habitat would place many plant and animal species in a race for their lives, and scientists do not yet know whether they would be able to migrate fast enough to outrun the change.
The report estimates that some species of vegetation would have to migrate 10 times faster than during the last glacial retreat, about 10,000 years ago.
''A considerable portion of the globe could eventually become devoid of tree cover,'' the report noted.
The report said the most vulnerable species are those who live in isolated or fragmented habitats, including the Gelada baboon of Ethiopia; the Australian mountain pygmy possum; the monarch butterfly, which spends its winters in Mexico; and the spoon-billed sandpiper of Siberia.
The report is designed to pressure politicians ahead of November's international climate-change summit in the Dutch city of The Hague, at which politicians will attempt to ratify the 1997 Kyoto agreement limiting greenhouse-gas emissions.
''Many countries are trying to find loopholes in the Kyoto agreement,'' said Andrew Kerr of the WWF's Climate Change campaign.
''They should know that the problem is much more of an immediate threat than they realized''.
Added Markham: ''Speed kills.
We're night-driving on a mountain road with the lights switched off.''
LONDON _ Global warming could wipe out many species of plants and animals by the end of the 21st century, the World Wide Fund for Nature said in a report issued here Thursday.
The fund, known in the United States as the World Wildlife Fund, paints a devastating picture of the ability of species from Arctic polar bears and walruses, to New England sugar maple trees, to survive unless they can migrate quickly and adapt to their new environment.
Particularly at risk, the report says, are species that are rare or live in mountainous or isolated places.
Among those singled out as vulnerable are the gelada baboon in Ethiopia; the monarch butterfly, which spends winters in Mexico; the Australian mountain pygmy possum; the northern spruce in New York state, and the spoon-billed sandpiper, which breeds in the far northeastern reaches of Russia.
According to the report, up to 70 percent of the natural habitat could be lost, and 20 percent of the species rendered extinct, in the Arctic and northernmost areas of places like Canada, Russia and Scandinavia, where warming is predicted to be most rapid.
Places farther to the south, including parts of Norway, Sweden, Finland, Estonia, Latvia, Iceland and Kyrgyzstan, could lose more than half of their natural habitat.
In the United States, the report says, more than a third of the existing habitat in Maine, New Hampshire, Oregon, Colorado, Wyoming, Idaho, Utah, Arizona, Kansas, Oklahoma and Texas could be irrevocably altered by global warming.
The report is based on the often used, but disputed, assumption that by the year 2100 there will have been a doubling of the emissions of carbon monoxide into the atmosphere from the level at the start of the industrial revolution.
``Rapid rates of global warming are likely to increase rates of habitat loss and species extinction, most markedly in the higher latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere,'' the report says.
``Extensive areas of habitat may be lost to global warming and many species may be unable to shift their ranges fast enough to keep up''.
According to Jennifer L.
Morgan, director of the World Wildlife Fund Climate Change Campaign in Washington, some species would have to migrate at a rate 10 times faster than after the last ice age in order to survive into the next century.
``Climate change is coming at us much faster than many habitats are going to be able handle,'' Morgan said.
``The speed of change caused by the change in climate is greater than most ecosystems are going to be able to adapt to.''
BEIJING (AP) _ Police in a far west Chinese region rocked by a series of terrorist attacks have arrested a group of suspects and seized firearms, an official newspaper reported.
The attacks occured in the Yili district of Xinjiang, a large, restive region where Muslim separatists are battling Chinese rule.
Acts of violent terrorism have occured ``many times'' in Yili since last year, the Xinjiang Daily said in its Aug.
24 edition, seen Saturday in Beijing.
Police responded with repeated efforts this year to suppress the terrorists, breaking up more than 10 criminal gangs, detaining a group of suspects and seizing guns and ammunition, the newspaper said.
It gave no details of the crackdown but said some police officers were killed and injured.
Since last year, Yili police have set up 33 new stations and hired 456 additional officers, it said.
Xinjiang was ruled by Chinese emperors for 200 years as a buffer state between China and the Muslim nations of Central Asia.
The Uighurs, Xinjiang's main ethnic group, briefly ran an independent state before communist forces retook the region in 1949.
Separatist sentiment, never fully quelled, has been reignited in recent years by the newly independent Central Asian nations created in the wake of the Soviet Union's collapse and by Iran's Islamic revolution.
China has tried to counter the effect by improving relations with Kazakstan, Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan, and getting them to pledge not to support anti-Chinese separatists.
BEIJING (AP) _ Threats by officials and a show of force by police forced farmers outside a south China provincial capital to abandon a planned protest Thursday, a rights group reported.
Farmers outside Changsha city blocked construction of a science park last month after the well-connected developer was three months late in paying them for their land, the Information Center of Human Rights and Democratic Movement reported.
Authorities sent 700 regular and armed police to clear away the protesters in Tianmashan village on Sept.
22, and police arrested six farmers and beat more than 20, some severely, the Hong Kong-based group said.
It gave the following account: When more than 300 villagers marched on the Hunan provincial government the following day, officials agreed to provide compensation.
But the villagers were not satisfied, saying the rate was well below the market price, and they vowed to stage another protest Thursday, China's National Day.
Local officials threatened the villagers against staging the protest, saying the government ``was not made of bean curd,'' the Hong Kong-based group said.
An official with the city police department denied the report.
``Nothing like that happened in Changsha.
It's a rumor,'' said the official, who gave only his surname, Li.
China has been hit by hundreds of mostly small-scale protests over the past two years by farmers and workers upset over layoffs, government policies and perceived official indifference or corruption.
The Information Center said one of those connected to the science park development was the brother-in-law of Wang Maolin, Hunan's Communist Party secretary.
BEIJING, September 14 (Xinhua) --A Chinese official said here today that although deepening economic reform will cause certain pressure on employment, it will by no means touch off social unrest.
Li Boyong, a delegate to the on-going 15th National Congress of the Communist Party of China, said deepening reforms in state-owned enterprises will bring about certain pressure on employment in urban areas in China, but it is within the handling capacity of the society, and is far from touching off any social unrest.
Li, who is also minister of labor, quoted the report delivered by Jiang Zemin at the congress as saying, "With the deepening of enterprise reforms, technological progress and readjustment of the economic structure, it would be hard to avoid the flow of personnel and lay-off".
"But no such 'disastrous outcome' as predicted by some overseas figures will go off," Li emphasized.
As far as Li was concerned, the employment situation in China faces both challenges and opportunities.
Li explained that while the number of laid-off workers is to increase in the wake of further reforms in state businesses, rapid development in non-public sectors and joint stock partnership businesses, on the other hand, will undoubtedly offer more job opportunities.
The abundant labor resource in China, which totals 834 million in number, does pose quite a headache to the country's employment, he said.
Each year, there are 10 million more people seeking jobs in towns and cities.
Many of them come from surplus factory worker forces, which stand at a staggering 20 million.
In addition, approximately 130 million peasants have become idle in the rural areas, and may compete with urbanites for jobs.
However, Li said, the ongoing reemployment project has scored great achievements.
Each year from 1992 to 1996, the newly employed outnumbered the laid-offs by a margin of eight million, thus maintaining an annual unemployment rate in urban areas at about 3 percent throughout.
TAIPEI, Taiwan (AP) --China's stepped up bomber flights and naval maneuvers set off a dispute Wednesday between Taiwanese defense officials and experts on whether the moves were an attempt to intimidate Taiwan.
The news of the military activity detected by Taiwan's intelligent services made the front pages of the island's leading newspapers Wednesday, sending Taiwan's jittery stock market down 4.3 percent.
Military officials said the drills might be a prelude to threatening war games to intimidate the island as its new president, Chen Shui-bian, prepares to take office May 20.
Chen has said he has no plans to seek independence unless China attacks to force a reunification.
Sun Tao-yu, vice-minister of defense, doubted that the recent military maneuvers were unusual.
He said China holds exercises every spring because of good weather.
But Sun said the military had to inform the public ''to remind the people of the concept of national defense'' on the island that split with China 51 years ago amid civil war.
Ting Yu-chou, chairman of the National Security Bureau, said Taiwan's military ''was jumping to conclusions,'' the United Evening News reported.
Ting said the air drills were normal and there were no indications of large-scale ground exercises.
Lin Chong-pin, vice-chairman of the Mainland Affairs Council which handles Taiwan's China policy, said the maneuvers were part of the mainland's psychological warfare against the island.
Beijing repeatedly has threatened to attack if Taiwan refuses to reunify and declares independence.
Lin, an expert on China's People's Liberation Army, said Beijing was trying to intimidate Taiwan into starting reunification talks because Chinese leaders lack the confidence to act on their threats of an all-out war with the island.
War, Lin said, was unlikely because China's leaders fear war would bring social unrest, economic upheaval and threaten their hold on power.
China's leaders also realize that war with Taiwan would involve the United States, which has shown ''a more positive attitude'' toward the island despite its recognition of Beijing, Lin said.
Former military chief Hau Pei-tsun, who was visited by president-elect Chen, said that the drills ''looked like normal air force exercises''.
Chen in turn urged China to use peaceful methods to improve ties. ''We want peace, harmony, cooperation,'' he said .
The New York Times said in an editorial for Wednesday, July 28: In a step recalling Maoist political re-education campaigns, Beijing has sent 1,200 officials belonging to the Falun Gong spiritual movement to special schools to study Communist literature and recant their allegiance to the group.
That is disturbing behavior from a Chinese leadership that proclaims its commitment to economic reform and modernization and that signed the International Convention on Civil and Political Rights guaranteeing Chinese citizens free expression, assembly and religion.
The Falun Gong says it has no political agenda, but it has a popular exiled leader, tens of millions of followers and a remarkable ability to organize protests under the noses of China's omnipresent police.
Beijing at first treated it cautiously, but has now banned the movement, confiscated its literature and detained thousands of members in a crackdown said to be ordered by President Jiang Zemin.
Special factors may explain the vehemence of Beijing's moves against the Falun Gong.
Rapidly growing religious cults are particularly frightening to Chinese governments because of their historical role in sparking unrest.
New religious groups have grown in recent years as the discrediting of Communist ideology and the suppression of democracy movements have left a spiritual void.
The Falun Gong's emergence also coincides with economic strains.
Growth rates are falling and unemployment rising.
New reforms advocated by Prime Minister Zhu Rongji like slimming state enterprises and liberalizing trade threaten further dislocation.
None of this justifies the persecutions now under way.
For most of its followers, the Falun Gong is not about protest but traditional Chinese techniques of exercise, breathing and meditation believed to channel the body's spiritual energy.
Those who have attended protest rallies are simply exercising internationally recognized rights of association and expression for which they should not be punished or forced to submit to ideological training.
Beijing's repression may only deepen public disenchantment with the authorities, and could divert energies from carrying out needed economic reforms.
China cannot arrive at the modern future it wants by returning to the ideological monitoring and indoctrination methods of the past.
BEIJING (AP) _ Five hundred state factory workers, unpaid for four months, broke a police line Monday and marched in protest through an impoverished southwestern Chinese city, a rights group reported.
The workers demanded back pay and shouted slogans decrying waste and corruption by state factory managers as they marched through Dujiangyan in Sichuan province, the Hong Kong-based Information Center of Human Rights and Democratic Movement in China said.
Officials with the Chengdu city government, which oversees Dujiangyan, confirmed the protest but refused to provide details.
The Information Center gave the following account: At 11:30 a.m., 500 workers from the Min River Timber Machinery Factory gathered near a bridge in the city's center and began to march.
Dozens of police tried to block them from a main thoroughfare.
But the angry demonstrators pushed through and police did not try to use force to stop them.
Two trends converged in sparking the unrest, the third demonstration by angry workers in Dujiangyan in 13 months.
The city, a famous scenic spot in Sichuan's western foothills, 60 kilometers (35 miles) northwest of Chengdu, is home to many bankrupt state industries.
Throughout China, hundreds of protests have erupted as uncompetitive state industries founder on capitalist market reforms.
In the case of Min River Timber, the money-losing venture was serving a logging industry in severe decline after decades of unrestrained clear-cutting of forests.
Last week, the government imposed a ban on logging in western Sichuan to stop the environmental damage that compounded disastrous flooding this summer.
Workers from the 2,000-employee Min River Timber appealed many times to the Dujiangyan government about their owed wages, but never received a reply, the Information Center said.
&LR; WASHINGTON _ One year after saying China had improved its human rights record, the Clinton administration on Friday issued one of its harshest condemnations of Beijing to date and described some of the most serious human rights violations in a decade.
Released on the eve of Secretary of State Madeleine K.
Albright's departure for China, at a time when President Clinton has been criticized for being too easy on the government in Beijing, the State Department's annual report on rights said that the country's Communist leaders had broken their promises to adhere to international human rights conventions and instead decided last fall ``to nip in the bud'' attempts to form independent democratic parties.
The government also imprisoned several thousand political and religious dissidents, tortured prisoners, suppressed Chinese of minority faiths, especially Christians, and imposed new restrictions on the press, including the Internet, according to the report.
Added to a new Pentagon report this week that said China was continuing to be a military threat to Taiwan, the human rights document led Congress on Friday to raise new questions about the effectiveness of the administration's policies of engagement with China.
Last year's rather mild description of China's human rights policies provoked criticism that the administration was overreacting to minor improvements in the hope of removing the issue as an obstacle to trade.
Sen. Paul Wellstone, D-Minn.
, said, ``There is a considerable indignation about the Chinese government's renewed human rights abuses, its proliferation of military technology and its threats to its neighbors''.
On Thursday, the Senate unanimously passed a resolution co-sponsored by Wellstone and Sen.
Tim Hutchinson, R-Ark.
, asking the administration to condemn China's human rights record at an upcoming U.N. meeting in Geneva.
``What's the hesitation of following up on this strong report with a strong condemnation _ unless commercial interests trump all other interests in this administration,'' Wellstone said.
The Clinton administration is unlikely to go along with that suggestion.
In a speech in San Francisco on Friday, President Clinton defended his administration's policy of engagement with China and suggested China was ``moving away from the rule of fear,' even though it was ``not yet rooted in the rule of law''.
Still, administration officials are worried that China is becoming a tinderbox.
``There is no question that the Chinese leadership is getting very nervous about dissidents and the opposition,'' said a senior official in the Clinton administration.
In presenting the report, Harold Hongju Koh, assistant secretary of state for democracy, human rights and labor, said Ms.
Albright would discuss the report's finding with Chinese leaders when she travels there this weekend but cautioned that even the most ``robust'' dialogue would not necessarily lead to changes in Chinese behavior.
``I think it's a mistake to conclude that the human rights in China is entirely a function of what U.S. policy is,'' Koh said.
``The question here is, how can developments within China, which have led to greater economic freedom, and efforts at legal reform, which could bring about sweeping change, be pressed and pushed through a process of engagement''?
There was no immediate response by the Chinese government to the State Department report.
(STORY CAN END HERE.
OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS) Clinton administration officials, scholars and leaders of human rights groups all agree that underlying the Chinese government's fears about social unrest is the downturn in the country's economy.
China's annual double-digit economic growth is a thing of the past, and Chinese leaders are worried that the growing ranks of the unemployed will join forces with political dissidents and angry farmers and create a situation beyond their control.
``They haven't had the growth they need to continue with their economic reforms,'' said a senior administration official involved in China policy.
``Their economy is flat.
Exports are flat and there is a real increase in labor unrest.
That's why the regime is very very anxious about political unrest''.
The report gave China high marks for continuing to open up the economy and thereby opening up society.
``Over all, average citizens go about their daily lives with more personal freedom than ever before: higher disposable income, looser economic controls, greater freedom of movement, increased access to outside sources of information, greater room for individual choice, and more diversity in cultural life,'' it said.
But it went on to say that economic reform has not brought political freedom and that Chinese who try to dissent ``live in an environment filled with repression''.
Edward Friedman, a China scholar at the University of Wisconsin, said, ``The hard-liners in the Chinese government are increasingly in control and the economic liberalizers have to be more circumspect''.
In recent years the Chinese earned praise from the administration for signing two major international conventions on economic, cultural, civil and political rights that include guarantees of the freedom of association, speech, assembly and religion.
China's leaders have said they would respect the spirit of the law until the national legislature ratified the treaties, a promise they broke with this year's violations.
``There has been a complete disparity in the commitments China has made by signing the various treaties and their practice of flagrantly violating their citizens' rights,'' said Mike Jendrzejczyk of Human Rights Watch.
The Pentagon's report to Congress on the military balance between China and Taiwan highlighted how Beijing's deployment of short range missiles aimed at the Taiwan Straits was meant to intimidate and threaten Taiwan.
While the report said there have been no recent increases in the number of missiles targeted at Taiwan in the past year, it added that China's plans to increase its cruise and ballistic missiles to attain an ``overwhelming advantage'' over Taiwan by the year 2005.
Congressional concerns over tensions between China and Taiwan as well as tensions between China and its southeast Asian neighbors over the Spratley Islands in the South China Sea have added to the overall deterioration in relations between China and the United States.
Those issues, as well as the ongoing repression in Tibet, will be discussed by Ms.
Albright in China next week in preparation for the visit by Prime Minister Zhu Rongji to Washington in April.
Moreover, in the coming months a series of anniversaries in China could spark unrest that might further test the leadership's tolerance of dissent.
June 4 is the 10th anniversary of the military crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrations in Tiananmen Square in Beijing, and on Oct.
1 the country will celebrate the 50th anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China.
``China as well as the Chinese are very anniversary conscious, and the leaders will definitely want to avoid unofficial demonstrations,'' Jendrzejczyk said.
``A leadership that's already focused on stability has become obsessed by it.''
HONG KONG _ Even before China regained sovereignty over this former British colony 16 months ago, authorities began to remove the face of Queen Elizabeth II from stamps, redesign the flag and repaint royal-crested mailboxes.
Yet today, one of the most obvious signs of British rule remains.
Emblazoned in huge letters on the local headquarters of China's People's Liberation Army is a strikingly inappropriate name: the Prince of Wales Building.
Before the 1997 handover, pundits predicted that China would rip the letters from the harborside tower as soon as People's Liberation Army troops arrived.
The troops are here, but the name remains on the barracks.
China's decision to leave it there seems a deliberate move to remain as discreet as possible.
And for good reason.
Here in Hong Kong, where one in six people marched to protest the 1989 crackdown on democracy protesters around Beijing's Tiananmen Square, distrust of the Chinese soldiers ran deep.
Half of Hong Kong's residents are refugees from China or descendants of refugees, and many worried that the new government might use troops to curtail their liberties.
But so far, doomsayers' predictions have fallen flat.
Far from cracking down on demonstrators, the People's Liberation Army has become all but invisible here.
``They have been told to lie low, stay in their barracks, not to mingle with the public, and for this they were rewarded with medals and citations when Jiang Zemin visited on the anniversary of the handover,'' said Willy Lam, China editor of the daily South China Morning Post.
``They were rewarded for doing nothing, for staying out of trouble''.
Aware of the People's Liberation Army image problem, China has kept its armed forces so low-profile that some Hong Kong residents now want to see more of them.
The growing, if guarded, trust in the soldiers here reflects the growth of Hong Kong's confidence in China's promise to let the capitalist enclave maintain civil liberties that are unavailable on the mainland.
Nonetheless, military analysts warn that if massive social unrest were to grip Hong Kong, something hard to imagine under current conditions, the People's Liberation Army would undoubtedly act in the event that Hong Kong's 27,500 police officers could not handle the situation, or if they refused to move against the local people.
The primary role of the estimated 4,700 troops here and 5,300 across the Chinese border ``is to create a degree of good will or trust to convince Hong Kong that they have nothing to fear from the handover, that being part of China is not going to impinge on their lives,'' said Ronald Montaperto, a Chinese security specialist at National Defense University in Washington.
So far, that mission appears to have succeeded.
A survey by Chinese University of Hong Kong found that the percentage of people satisfied with the People's Liberation Army has risen from 30 percent in July 1997 to more than 50 percent this past June.
They are people like Leo Tang, a 17-year-old student who visited the naval barracks recently.
``We all know of Tiananmen Square, so I wondered if they would act the same way here if there were protests,'' Tang said.
``But it seems China has gone out of its way to choose a special group of soldiers here''.
According to a poll by the University of Hong Kong, as approval of the People's Liberation Army grew, satisfaction with the Hong Kong police has dropped, from 79 percent a year ago to 66 percent.
On the few occasions when demonstrators have denounced China or rallied for banned causes such as independence for Taiwan, it has been the police who have drowned out slogans with loud music or hauled protesters to the station.
In contrast, soldiers have been restricted to barracks except for rare field trips in civilian clothes.
Ironically, their absence from bars and restaurants that depended on the patronage of British troops has aroused complaints from pub owners who a year ago worried that Chinese troops might intimidate customers.
Even official business has been kept almost comically low-profile.
When the US Navy invited top Chinese officers onboard the visiting USS Blue Ridge, the Chinese were concerned about boarding the ship because they would have to walk through a busy shopping mall.
To avoid alarming civilians by marching through a public area in uniform, the Chinese asked US officials to devise a route to enter as unobtrusively as possible _ via a parking garage.
According to law, the People's Liberation Army can assist authorities in a crisis _ a natural disaster or unrest _ but only if requested by Hong Kong's Chief Executive and approved by Beijing.
It is hard to imagine social unrest extreme enough to destabilize Hong Kong.
But Tai Ming Cheung, a People's Liberation Army specialist, cautioned, ``If you asked me in 1988 if they'd have any reason to intervene on the mainland, I would have said no.
But in 1989, they did''.
So far, controversies involving the army here have been small-scale: a dispute over customs checks, a few traffic accidents, and a misunderstanding over nighttime firing practice in villages in rural Hong Kong.
The People's Liberation Army remains secretive, however.
It set up a telephone line for the media that goes unanswered, and it ignores interview requests.
Democratic politicians say that the army should be more open and have more contact with society because soldiers who befriend locals would hesitate to act against them.
Yet mixing with locals would be difficult on a soldier's salary of $66 a month.
That is hardly enough for dinner for two in Hong Kong.
So contact has been limited to posing with locals for pictures.
The most startling exception occurred during a bizarre Open House at the barracks on National Day, Oct.
1. Thousands of curious locals stood in line for hours to get tickets, and the atmosphere resembled a family picnic more than a military tour.
Parents pressed babies up for photos with soldiers.
Officers sang, danced, showed how they make beds.
``Before this...
they seemed so severe and fierce.
Now I'm changing my opinion.
They're quite friendly, singing and dancing,'' said Kwok Yuk-may, a 43-year-old housewife who joined in karaoke with soldiers.
``Why should we be afraid of them?
We're all Chinese.''
"Some people thought that the Falun Gong cult had no organizations and political programs.
But now, we have seen very clearly its political motives," said Chi Xuezhi, president of the provincial Academy of Social Sciences.
Li Hongzhi's "doomsday" remarks, filled with strong anti- society and anti-government connotations, were aimed at causing social unrest and molding public opinion for his political ambitions, said Xu Ningsheng, a professor at Zhongshan University in south China's Guangdong Province.
The New York Times said in an editorial for Friday, April 7: Reports are only now reaching the United States of serious unrest in the northeast Chinese mining city of Yangjiazhangzi almost six weeks ago.
An account in The Washington Post this week described three days of violent rioting over job cuts and corruption that overwhelmed local police forces and continued until regular army troops arrived.
This is just the kind of social upheaval that terrifies the leadership in Beijing, who well know that protests by disenchanted citizens could someday escalate again into a serious threat to Communist rule.
Hundreds of economic protests, some of them violent, have erupted across China in recent years, rarely, if ever reported in the Chinese news media.
The Yangjiazhangzi events were unusually unruly, but worker and peasant protests have become increasingly frequent.
Market reforms like the privatization of large state companies produce unemployment and social dislocation.
When this takes place in an atmosphere of pervasive government corruption, popular anger is understandable.
Unless Beijing enforces higher ethical standards on local officials, unrest could soon become even more widespread.
State companies are scheduled to lay off more than 10 million workers before the end of this year.
Anger over alleged corruption seems to have played a major role in Yangjiazhangzi.
Miners, a formidable protest group in many societies, were already aggrieved over economic issues.
A large state-owned molybdenum mine there stopped issuing paychecks early last year.
Last November, most of the mine was shut down, but some of its facilities and equipment were apparently transferred to new private owners alleged to be friends of local officials.
What detonated the violence was the belated announcement of an extremely modest severance package for the laid-off workers.
The contrast between what looked like an undeserved windfall for the well connected and the shabby treatment of longtime employees became even more of an affront when mine authorities refused to show up at a peaceful protest meeting.
For several years now, Communist leaders in Beijing have seemed haunted by fears of explosive social unrest.
Their answer has generally been repression, along with strident nationalist campaigns designed to distract the country's attention from economic grievances.
Instead, Beijing should crack down on the corruption that has grown worse with the progress of economic reform.
Show trials of a few spectacularly corrupt individuals have not been enough to discourage others on the take.
Market reforms have benefited China and brightened economic prospects for many of its workers and peasants.
But the current phase of selling off state factories and mines is creating hardships for many longtime employees.
When they see local party officials drawing illicit profits from their sacrifices, they are sure to protest.
Beijing should heed the message from Yangjiazhangzi. &QL;
BEIJING, May 27 (Xinhua) --Duan Zhengkun, vice-minister of justice, was elected president of the All-China Association of People's Mediators here today at the national congress of the association.
The ACAPM, founded in 1993, is a national organization for mediators of civil disputes.
BEIJING _ The Chinese government on Sunday night announced sweeping increases in salaries, pensions and welfare payments for 84 million people, describing the move as a birthday gift as the country prepares to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic.
Officials clearly hope the raises will help their attack, as yet futile, on a stubborn case of deflation that is holding down economic growth.
Insecure about their financial prospects, consumers are saving rather than spending and the retail price index has declined for some 22 months.
The pay increases, which are generally in the range of 15 percent to 30 percent and are retroactive to July 1, will go to workers and retirees in government offices, schools and other state-funded facilities.
In addition, monthly subsidies to millions of unemployed workers and urban poor people will increase by an average of 30 percent, according to the announcement on national television news Sunday night.
As for beleaguered state-owned enterprises, the announcement said they must decide on wages ``according to their efficiency''.
The announcement was not a surprise because officials have publicly said in recent weeks that a raise was in store.
The raise will cost the government more than $6 billion for the second half of this year, said the finance minister, Xiang Huicheng, in a television interview Sunday night.
The average increase for public workers will be only $15 a month, officials said.
Many senior bureaucrats and college professors earn little more than $100 a month in cash salary, plus bonuses and other benefits.
At the same time, many workers face rising rents as the government tries to reduce housing subsidies and create a commercial housing market.
Growth in the first half of this year is said to be 7.6 percent, just under last year's annual rate, but many experts say these figures are significantly overstated.
Slowed growth and rising unemployment in the last two years have contributed to social unrest.
In another effort to goad people into spending more, the government said last week that it would begin taxing the interest earned on personal savings accounts.
Many Chinese are not accustomed to paying income tax and that measure was greeted by much grumbling.
The government is also continuing to issue bonds for infrastructure projects, but as it runs out of options it may also have to consider devaluation of the yuan in the coming year to get the needed economic jolt, some foreign economists say.
In the interview Sunday night, Xiang, the finance minister, said he hoped that the raises would stimulate consumption and help to reduce the growing ``irregularities'' in salaries _ a reference to the huge gulf in compensation between middle- and upper-level civil servants and people in the growing private sector.
Asked whether the raises had been timed with the Oct.
1 anniversary in mind, Xiang replied, ``Yes, of course.
The 50th anniversary is a time when all of China is celebrating.''
BEIJING (AP) _ Farmers upset over high government taxes drove their tractors into an eastern Chinese city to block traffic in protest, a Hong Kong-based rights group reported Wednesday.
The demonstration Tuesday in Bengbu marked the latest outburst of discontent by farmers and workers who feel harmed by China's capitalist-style reforms and neglected by an indifferent or corrupt officialdom.
About 100 farmers from Mopanzhang village outside Bengbu pulled their tractors in front of the city's government office building Tuesday morning, the Information Center of Human Rights and Democratic Movement in China said.
One unidentified demonstrator told the rights group that the government had raised taxes and fees despite an appeal by China's legislature in March ``to reduce the peasants' burdens''.
Large numbers of police were sent to the scene and the farmers agreed to leave peacefully around noontime after meeting with a city official to discuss their grievances, the rights group said.
A spokesman for Bengbu's police department refused to comment on the demonstration.
Farmers and workers were once treated as protected, revolutionary classes by the ruling Communist Party.
Their current disaffection threatens to further undermine the party's tattered legitimacy and poses a challenge to its continued rule.
BEIJING (AP) _ China's villages must be run more openly and democratically, top government and Communist Party leaders say in a new order sent to rural communities, state media reported Thursday.
The circular says village leaders can no longer make decisions in secret about spending public money for development projects, leasing out farm land, birth control and distribution of relief funds.
Democratic and open village government is needed to improve relations between the ruling Communist party and the people and to promote rural development and stability, according to the new order, which was issued by the party's policy-making Central Committee and the State Council, the highest government body.
China has had a national law establishing elections at the village level since 1987.
The Ministry of Civil Affairs has promoted secret ballots, candidate speeches and fair election procedures throughout the country.
But the new order suggested that elections alone have not guaranteed that villages run their affairs democratically or have been able to rid themselves of local bullies.
It also showed that the central government wants to ensure that the countryside does not erupt in unrest.
The order was played prominently on the front page of the People's Daily, the main newspaper of the Communist Party.
Rural people, who make up 70 percent of China's 1.2 billion people, are the Communist Party's ``reliable force'' and ``the broadest and deepest mass base for political power in our country,'' the government's order said.
It called for several specific improvements in how China's 1 million villages are run.
Each village must post a report about village affairs at least every three months.
Villagers also are supposed to keep tabs on their leaders by forming congresses of all village residents or representatives.
Leaders should make decisions based on the majority's views, the order says.
Officials also are ordered to make public their own salaries and performance reviews.
The order also warns that vote buying is illegal.
``Malpractice by a few officials acting willfully regardless of the villagers' wishes must be corrected resolutely,'' it said.
BEIJING (AP) _ Several thousand taxi drivers angered by new government fees protested outside city offices, paralyzing part of a Chinese provincial capital for three days last week.
All but a few hundred of Shijiazhuang's 4,000 taxi drivers walked off the job Wednesday night, and by 9 a.m.
Thursday 1,000 striking cabbies had mobbed entrances and streets around the city government office, a human rights group said Sunday.
Hundreds of police tried to get the protesters to stop blocking the streets, and the angry strikers attacked cabbies who did not join in the strike, the Hong Kong-based Information Center of Human Rights and Democratic Movement in China reported.
A plan announced last month to stop issuing new taxi operating licenses and to raise registration fees in Shijiazhuang _ capital of Hebei province, 250 kilometers (150 miles) south of Beijing _ provoked the strike, said the Information Center.
Protests and sporadic attacks on strike-breakers continued until city officials agreed Saturday afternoon to put off the new policy, said the Information Center and an official in the Hebei propaganda office, who gave only his surname, Wang.
While the Information Center reported that 3,000 taxi drivers went on strike, the official would say only that several thousand took part.
He added that there were no arrests.
BEIJING _ In late 1997, President Jiang Zemin announced that China would cut the People's Liberation Army, then 3 million strong, by half a million troops as part of China's drive for a leaner, more advanced military that could both defend the homeland and reinforce China's image as a power in Asia.
What the president did not say was that as the army shrank, another, more secretive branch of the military, dedicated to internal stability, was already expanding.
At the very time of Jiang's speech, it was absorbing 14 army divisions, or more than 100,000 troops.
The expansion of the People's Armed Police, a national force trained in riot control, reflects the leaders' growing preoccupation with domestic unrest.
It also reflects their wish to avoid having to resort to army combat troops to quell popular demonstrations, as occurred in 1989 around Tiananmen Square with disastrously bloody results.
Over the last year, according to witnesses and other accounts, armed police units were called out to help the ordinary police contain many of the hundreds of demonstrations and protests reported around China.
The armed police have also battled ethnic separatists in the heavily Muslim province of Xinjiang, and have long been used to help control Tibet.
The protests bubbling up around China, almost always centered on economic complaints, have generally been small, and dispersed peacefully.
But with urban unemployment soaring and farmers restive over high taxes and corruption, Jiang has proclaimed domestic stability as this year's No.
1 priority.
And he apparently looks to the force he has built up _ now 1 million strong, Western analysts say _ to keep any unrest from getting out of hand.
``As a major force for maintaining state security and social stability, the People's Armed Police shoulders a massive and formidable burden,'' he said on a visit to an armed police barracks in Beijing last month.
Last year, two China experts from the U.S. military stated the force's purpose even more baldly.
``By increasing the size of the People's Armed Police, the leadership in Beijing implicitly acknowledges that internal unrest is a greater threat to the regime's survival and Chinese economic modernization than is foreign invasion,'' said John F.
Corbett Jr.
, an American officer, and Dennis J.
Blasko, writing in China Strategic Review, a journal published in Washington.
Corbett, who works in the Pentagon, and Blasko, now a consultant, both previously served as military attaches in Beijing.
Officers of the People's Armed Police, which was formed in the early 1980s from a combination of army and public security units, declined to be interviewed.
Like Western riot policemen, the People's Armed Police officers are supposed to control demonstrations with minimal violence _ preferably with intimidation, shields and sometimes tear gas, although they carry guns and have heavier weapons.
The expansion and upgrading of the force accelerated after 1989, when it may have numbered about 600,000.
That year, the armed police's failure to disperse student demonstrators in Beijing forced the leaders to call in combat units, which killed hundreds of civilians and did lasting damage to China's image as well as to army morale.
Civilian police sometimes carry weapons too, but operate under command of the Public Security Ministry rather than the military, as most People's Armed Police units do.
The army has been only too happy to shed an unpopular mission for its regular forces.
Freed from worry about crowd control, which requires entirely different skills and equipment, the People's Liberation Army ``can concentrate on becoming a modern, externally oriented force,'' said David Shambaugh, a China expert at George Washington University and the Brookings Institution in Washington.
The expansion of the armed police may also give Jiang, who had no military experience, an important personal base of power, outside experts believe.
Deployments of the armed police to quell unrest are rarely announced, but there is evidence that they have been in action numerous times around China in the past year.
State news media often portray the armed police in more benign roles _ like working alongside regular soldiers to pile sandbags during last summer's record floods.
But in January, 9,000 armed police were sent to help existing forces ranged against a violent separatist movement in the western province of Xinjiang.
In rural Hunan in January, hundreds of armed police officers dispersed a crowd of many thousands of angry farmers by lobbing tear-gas grenades and charging with clubs, villagers said.
One man was killed by an exploding gas grenade and dozens were injured.
Most demonstrations have ended peacefully.
But Western analysts question whether the People's Armed Police would be up to its job in the event of large-scale unrest, particularly if the job of controlling it falls to the underequipped, poorly trained units deployed in areas far from big cities like Beijing and Shanghai.
``The question now is whether the People's Armed Police is up to the task,'' said a Western analyst who has closely studied the armed police, and spoke on condition of anonymity.
``Because of a limited budget and long-term quality and management problems, i's still debatable whether they can perform well in a major crisis''.
(STORY CAN END HERE _ OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS) nn In Beijing, armed police officers guard embassies and constantly patrol Tiananmen Square.
Other armed police units are involved in border defense, and guarding power plants and important sites like gold mines.
But some 730,000 of the 1 million armed police are primarily charged with maintaining public order, according to the latest estimate by the International Institute for Strategic Studies in London.
Since the 1989 debacle, numerous army units have transferred to the armed police, mostly the lowest-ranking infantry and artillery divisions.
``They were the dregs'' of the army, said James Mulvenon, a military expert with Rand Corp.
in Washington, of the 14 divisions shifted in 1997.
It is unclear how much training and support these transfers and new recruits have received for their increasingly delicate role.
``I don't see much evidence'' that the People's Armed Police ``has really improved its operational capabilities very much since 1989,'' Mulvenon said.
In the mid-1990s, in an apparent effort to improve management and training, control of most units was shifted from the Ministry of Public Security to the Central Military Commission.
The top officers have been drawn from the People's Liberation Army.
But outside experts believe that command is relatively decentralized, and that provincial political leaders have considerable say over how the armed police troops are used.
As with the regular army, corruption and extensive involvement in outside businesses have weakened many units, and the armed police have been ordered to relinquish business activities.
The armed police were already chronically underfunded, Mulvenon said, in part because they must draw money from several different sources that have no control over their operations.
The costs are shared among provincial governments, the Ministry of Civil Affairs and Public Security Ministry, among others.
BEIJING _ China intensified its offensive against the Buddhist Law spiritual movement Thursday, announcing a ban on the organization and unleashing a barrage of charges against its founder that revealed how seriously the government takes the sect as a challenge to its rule.
The government's ban on the group, known in Chinese as Falun Gong, had been rumored since the police rounded up more than 100 leaders of the sect in several Chinese cities earlier this week.
But the ferocity of Beijing's campaign, aimed at a group of mainly middle-aged people who practice a form of Chinese breathing exercises and meditation, suggests that it regards Falun Gong as more than a movement of physical and moral uplift.
At a time when China's economy is slowing and social unrest is rising, officials here view this amorphous but fast-growing sect as a dangerous political force.
After Beijing handed down its edict Thursday afternoon, it began an extraordinary public-relations assault on the group and its founder, Li Hongzhi, through state-run television and newspapers.
The Ministry of Civil Affairs accused Falun Gong of ``inciting and creating disturbances, and jeopardizing social stability''.
In an editorial scheduled for publication on Friday, the Communist Party newspaper People's Daily said Li was pursuing a hidden political agenda that posed a ``massive threat'' to Chinese society.
State media also accused Li of misleading followers about his birth date, so that he could claim to be a reincarnation of Sakyamuni, the founder of Buddhism and of accepting payments for supposedly miraculous cures.
Li, 48, a former grain bureau clerk who left China for the United States last year, fashioned his sect from an eclectic blend of traditional breathing exercises, as well as elements of Buddhism and Taoism.
His followers say they disavow politics and embrace Li's teachings for their physical and spiritual health.
But Falun Gong deeply unsettled China's rulers when 10,000 of its adherents materialized on April 25 in front of the compound that houses President Jiang Zemin and other leaders.
The rally, held to demand official recognition for the group, demonstrated that this obscure spiritual sect was in fact a highly organized movement with an international network capable of mobilizing thousands of people and putting them under the noses of China's top leaders without a whisper of warning.
As word of the detentions spread this week, thousands of Falun Gong followers massed in front of government offices in Dalian, Guangzhou and 28 other cities to protest the government's crackdown, according to members of the group and a human rights organization in Hong Kong.
The wall-to-wall coverage of the ban in the state-run media underscores that the government is determined to stamp out Falun Gong.
But with a large and rapidly growing membership _ estimates range from the government's figure of 2 million to the group's claim of 100 million followers worldwide _ a fluid structure, and an appreciation of the power of the Internet to pass information, Falun Gong could prove an elusive quarry for Beijing.
``I think this is going to make us stronger,'' said Sophie Xiao, a spokeswoman for Falun Gong in Hong Kong.
``People are not simple-minded.
Educated people will hear about this group and check it out''.
There were no reports of protests following Thursday's announcement.
Late Thursday afternoon, hundreds of police and troops still circled Zhongnanhai, the leaders' compound, which has been a fortress since the crackdown began on Monday night.
The police continued to stop traffic on the western edge of the complex, where Falun Gong members held their rally in April.
A former Chinese official said police in Beijing had released several hundred people _ most of them women _ who had been detained as they massed near Zhongnanhai on Tuesday and Wednesday.
Chinese officials were clearly concerned about how the ban would be received abroad.
Shortly before the announcement was made public, a high-ranking government official briefed foreign correspondents here on why the government felt it necessary to take such Draconian action.
The official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said Beijing had moved against Falun Gong because of ``the danger it posed to our country and our people.
Any responsible government would do the same''.
He said members of the group had harassed government offices and pro-Beijing news organizations.
And he said the government had evidence that Li had been in Beijing for the three days prior to the April rally in front of Zhongnanhai.
Li, he said, had been instrumental in planning it.
The strident tone and sheer volume of the denunciations of Falun Gong baffled some experts in Chinese politics.
Why, they asked, would the government pour so much energy into fighting a group which, by its estimates, has 2 million members _ far fewer than the 100 million the group claims?
``After all, a few months ago hardly anyone had heard of it, and no one was saying it was a threat to the state,'' said one political scholar in Beijing, who spoke on condition of anonymity.
``I think the party leaders felt personally insulted by the Falun Gong protest.
It made them look like fools''.
(STORY CAN END HERE.
OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS) A former government official said Thursday that the unexpected demonstration last April particularly unnerved Jiang.
In briefings with government officials earlier this week, this person said, a senior leader quoted Jiang as harshly criticizing Li and the movement.
Experts said there were plenty of reasons for Beijing to worry about this kind of group.
With its mixture of martial arts and mysticism, Falun Gong appeals to people who have felt adrift since Deng Xioaping began reforming the Chinese economy and relaxing social controls in 1979.
Popular groups like Falun Gong played a profoundly disruptive role in the final decades of the last imperial dynasty.
And as the communist government approaches the 50th anniversary of its rule, on Oct.
1, China's economic engine is sputtering.
With China embarking on an ambitious campaign to overhaul its state sector _ one that has already resulting in huge layoffs _ Beijing is bracing itself for widespread unrest.
Signs that the government may feel vulnerable abounded in the flood of official denunciations Thursday.
``We must fully recognize the massive threat that the rampant spread of the Falun Gong organization is to the party, government, and people,'' said the editorial prepared for Friday's People's Daily.
In a 70-minute documentary that has been rerun almost nonstop Thursday on state television, Falun Gong was portrayed as a pernicious cult that leads members to mental instability, madness, even murder.
BEIJING (AP) _ Several hundred disgruntled residents staged protests Wednesday in Xi'an, the Chinese city famed for its terracotta warriors that will be President Clinton's first stop in China later this month, according to a Hong Kong-based human rights group.
The peaceful demonstrations by two groups with different grievances against the government began Tuesday morning.
A group of about 150 people were protesting the government's failure to allocate them new housing after they were evicted from their homes for redevelopment, the Information Center of Human Rights and Democratic Movement in China said.
They were soon joined by some 200 pedicab drivers protesting the city's decision ahead of Clinton's June 25-26 visit not to allow them to work as taxi drivers, the group said.
Many of the pedicab drivers are disabled and depend on their jobs hauling passengers and small loads of furniture and other goods for their livelihood.
Police did not intervene, and the demonstrators dispersed at about 6 p.m.
Tuesday. They resumed their protest Wednesday morning, the human rights center said.
Xi'an police and government officials denied that any protests had occurred, although they confirmed that the city had prohibited pedicab owners from hiring out their vehicles.
Xi'an, a grimy industrial city that was once the imperial capital on China's Silk Road, has been the site of several protests in recent months.
The Hong Kong-based group reported last week that police in Xi'an had beaten one of the thousands of onlookers watching a sit-in on June 2 by 200 workers from the No.
1 Construction Co.
who were protesting layoffs.
The demonstrations are the latest in steady outbursts of unrest as reform-minded Chinese leaders allow bankrupt state industries to lay off millions of workers.
In cities throughout China, many of the unemployed have taken to driving taxis and pedicabs to make ends meet.
In May, some 500 taxi drivers surrounded Xi'an government offices to protest licensing fees they believed were unfair.
&UR; (ek)
BEIJING _ Dealing out the fourth lengthy prison term to political dissenters in a week, China Sunday convicted a man for ``providing intelligence to hostile foreign organizations'' because he gave an interview about farmer protests to the U.S.-financed Radio Free Asia, a human rights group said.
After an unusual Sunday trial in the southern province of Hunan that lasted less than three hours, the defendant, Zhang Shanguang, 42, was sentenced to 10 years in prison, according to the group Human Rights in China, based in New York.
Zhang previously spent seven years in prison for organizing an independent labor union in 1989.
This year, before his detention in July, he had formed a group to protect laid-off workers and tried to register it with local officials.
Chinese authorities, fearing social unrest at a time of rising unemployment, appear to be especially fearful of any labor organizations outside Communist Party control, and of any efforts to link up disaffected workers with democracy campaigners.
Earlier this week, as part of the most severe crackdown on dissidents here in two years, three longtime activists who promoted a new China Democracy Party, Xu Wenli, Qin Yongmin and Wang Youcai, were convicted on subversion charges and given sentences of 11 to 13 years.
At his brief trial Sunday in Huaihua City, Hunan, Zhang was charged with ``illegally providing intelligence to hostile foreign organizations and persons,'' according to his lawyer and relatives.
The indictment specifically named a telephone interview Zhang gave last March to Radio Free Asia in which he discussed a protest against high taxes by 70 to 80 farmers in one Hunan county, and another incident in which a farmer who refused to pay a tax was killed.
Numerous such farmer protests have been reported around the country in recent years and top national leaders have spoken out against high, unfair burdens put on peasants by local and county governments.
Radio Free Asia, which was set up in 1996 and receives all of its funds from Congress, broadcasts news and other programs into China from transmitters in Central Asia and the Pacific.
The Chinese government sees the network as hostile and tries, with some success, to jam the broadcasts, which often emphasize democracy-related subjects that are banned in the national media.
``We deeply regret this action,'' said Daniel Southerland, executive editor of Radio Free Asia, speaking by telephone from Washington Sunday.
In the March interview, Southerland said, journalists called Zhang to verify reports of the farmer protests and ``he didn't say anything that wasn't widely known _ certainly it wasn't national security information''.
``If they want to do someone in like this, they can always find an excuse,'' Southerland said.
Radio Free Asia, which broadcasts in native languages to eight countries where news is censored, frequently quotes Chinese residents on its programs, though does not use names when it appears the speaker would be endangered.
Reeling from the recent trials, China's remaining dissidents are now waiting to see if the government will stop with the jailing of a few leaders or continue on with more arrests.
In general, only those who have been actively involved in organizing the new political party or independent worker groups have been imprisoned for any length of time.
In contrast to earlier decades, Chinese people today are fairly free to voice dissenting opinions in private _ so long as they do not act on them.
In two recent speeches, widely publicized by the official media, President and Communist Party Chief Jiang Zemin stressed the overriding importance of protecting social stability and said that any threats to the supremacy of the Communist Party would be ``annihilated in the early stages''.
Western governments as well as democracy advocates here had hoped that China's signing this year of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which calls for free speech and assembly, would lead to a softening of political controls.
But in recent weeks the government has made it clear that any actions perceived to imperil Communist Party rule will be defined as threats to national security _ and therefore outside the purview of the global treaty and other human rights conventions.
BEIJING (AP) _ Workers from a state-run cement factory surrounded government offices in central China for five days to protest a plan to privatize their plant, a rights group reported Monday.
All 600 workers at the Luoyang Cement Products Factory fear a cheap sale of both state assets and their future, the New York-based Human Rights in China reported.
About 200 workers besieged city government offices in Luoyang, in Henan province, from Monday to Friday last week demanding that approval of the sale to a private company be reversed, the group said.
Confirming the demonstrations, an official in charge of economic planning for Luoyang said the protesters dispersed after the government pledged to look into the workers' concerns.
No one was arrested or hurt, said the official with the city's Economic and Trade Commission, who only gave his surname, Pan.
Small-scale demonstrations have become almost daily occurrences in many Chinese cities as workers, the unemployed, farmers and pensioners feel they are losing out to market reforms and being abandoned by an indifferent or corrupt officialdom.
The contentious sale of the Luoyang cement factory underscores the dangers facing Beijing a year into its ambitious three-year plan to reform the largely inefficient, virtually bankrupt state sector.
Local officials have been quick to sell the best state assets, in some cases steering them to cronies.
Unrest among workers _ long used to the cradle-to-grave services of central planning _ has sharpened.
Human Rights in China said the protesters believed that the privatization plan would leave them without jobs and pensions.
They also contended that the plant was one of the city's top 100 taxpayers as recently as 1996, with 200 million yuan (dlrs 24.2 million) in assets.
But the city agreed to sell the factory for 2 million yuan (dlrs 242,000) to the private Zhongtai Company, Human Rights in China said.
Mr. Pan of the Luoyang Economic and Trade Commission said the sale will be put on hold until all concerns are settled.
BEIJING (AP) --China will raise stipends to unemployed workers by 30 percent as part of a series of measures intended to arrest the economic slide and brighten public sentiment ahead of the country's 50th anniversary of communist rule.
Labor and Social Security Minister Zhang Zuoji promised that increased payments would begin before the Oct.
1 anniversary.
Pensions are also to be raised by varying degrees, Zhang told the executive committee of China's legislature, according to state media.
The announcements were made as Beijing prepared its second large-scale rehearsal of the planned Oct.
1 parade and performance by a half-million people on Tiananmen Square.
Police closed off streets leading to the square late Saturday, and buses brought in students and others for the practice session.
Unemployment has soared as once centrally planned industries trim bloated payrolls to cope with free-market reforms.
With millions of Chinese trying to survive on meager stipends, the communist leadership has worried about the potential for unrest.
Zhang told the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress that more than 7.4 million urban workers lost their jobs in the first half of the year, and 5.4 million of them have not found new work.
Prices have fallen for 22 months in a row, unaffected by interest rate cuts that have failed to ignite consumer spending.
Before the welfare increases, the average jobless worker received a $20 stipend and another $10 for life, medical and unemployment insurance, the Xinhua News Agency reported.
But Zhang said 300,000 workers laid off this year never received their stipends.
He noted that many local governments had been unable to collect sufficient revenues to cover the payments.
The government also has announced a 30 to 40 percent pay increase for civil servants, and halved a tax on fixed-asset investments.
BEIJING (AP) --Seven million Chinese workers will lose their jobs in state factories as China pushes ahead with reforms of the debt-ridden government-run industrial sector, a Chinese newspaper reported Tuesday.
Vice Minister of Labor and Social Security Wang Jianlun said the government would limit layoffs to 7 million, or 1 million people fewer than last year, the China Daily said.
In order to reform its state factories, China needs to lay off even more workers.
Government leaders, however, have warned the layoffs must be restricted to prevent unrest.
The government expects to spend 24.5 billion yuan ($3 billion) to retrain and provide stipends for laid-off workers this year, Wang said.
Workers who lose jobs in China's state-owned factories get monthly allowances of 140 yuan to 380 yuan ($17 to $46) when they enroll at training centers, the report said.
The allowances are paid by the government, an unemployment insurance fund and the state factories.
Wang acknowledged that some of the troubled factories had been failing to pay pensions.
He said the government would ensure at least 50 percent of the pensions owed would be paid by the end of the year.
February 26,1989 --Stability is an overriding issue among China's problems, Deng Xiaoping pointed out while meeting with the then U.S.
President George Bush.
on April 15, Hu Yaobang passed away.
Various mourning activities were held by people and students.
But, a small number of people took advantage of this to spread rumors, attacking the Party and state leaders, inciting the people to oppose the leadership of the Party and the socialist system.
The People's Daily, the organ of the CPC Central Committee, carried an editorial saying that there must be a clear-cut stand against unrest on April 26.
That unrest developed into turmoil because of the support and connivance of Zhao Ziyang.
The so-called "Federation of Autonomous Student Unions", an illegal student organization, urged its supporters to stage a hunger strike in Tian'anmen Square beginning on May 13.
The State Council decided to declare a martial law in parts of Beijing starting from May 20.
However, the organizers of the unrest and those scheming in the background took advantage of the restraints of the government and troops, and went about organizing various illegal activities which led to a counter revolutionary rebellion.
The State Council repealed martial law conditions on parts of Beijing on January 11, 1990.
On May 16, 1989, Sino-Soviet relations were normalized according to an announcement made by Deng Xiaoping during his meeting with Mikhail Gorbachev, the then president of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR and the then general secretary of the Soviet Communist Party.
BEIJING (AP) --A shortage of tear gas and rubber bullets forced China's military to open fire 10 years ago on demonstrators in Tiananmen Square, a former top Communist Party member said Friday.
Keeping to the party's official version of the controversial 1989 melee, Zhu Muzhi said troops were justified in firing on ``thugs'' who killed soldiers and threw rocks and gas bombs.
But he acknowledged that ``innocent'' people were also killed in the crackdown on democracy advocates.
Zhu suggested that with better anti-riot equipment and more experience in dealing with civil unrest, the Chinese government might have avoided heavy loss of life.
``We never imagined there would be such an incident, that so many thugs would surround and beat the People's Liberation Army,'' Zhu, then a member of an advisory commission of party elders, told reporters.
``The police at the time had no rubber bullets, no tear gas canisters, they had nothing.
In the end, the only weapon they had at hand was guns''.
In the assault, ``many people on the streets who were watching the goings-on possibly were hit by flying bullets.
They, in fact, were innocent,'' said Zhu, who now heads a government-backed society for human rights studies.
Hundreds were killed when Chinese troops shot their way through Beijing on June 4, 1989, to quell seven weeks of peaceful protests in Tiananmen Square calling for democratic reform.
The government said the protests were an anti-government rebellion that needed to be put down with force.
It has never given a credible account of the number of dead and injured, or of the thousands imprisoned in the wave of arrests that followed.
With the 10th anniversary of the protest movement drawing near, Chinese authorities are particularly nervous about any attempts at public commemoration.
A witness to the crackdown disputed Zhu's claim that police lacked riot gear.
Robin Munro, formerly with Human Rights Watch, said he saw Chinese police with riot shields, helmets and leather boots in Beijing after martial law was declared on May 20 --16 days before the military assault.
``They had no justification in sending in the army.
Period,'' he said.
Zhu's claims are ``just an excuse to justify the unjustifiable''.
Speaking at a luncheon hosted by the Foreign Correspondents' Club of China, Zhu recalled seeing ``thugs'' chase a group of soldiers during the crackdown and throw one of them off a highway overpass.
The crowd burned the body, he said.
The protests ``had evolved into the stage where the people wanted to overthrow the government,'' Zhu said.
``I understand why at last the PLA soldiers were forced to shoot''.
Under further questioning, Zhu conceded that police did have ``a little'' tear gas at their disposal.
China has beefed up its riot and paramilitary police, particularly in Beijing, since the crackdown.
A decade of uninterrupted economic growth since 1989 proved the crackdown was correct, Zhu claimed.
``If the handling of June 4 had been totally wrong then these past 10 years would have been difficult.
China would definitely have been in total chaos,'' he said.
BEIJING (AP) _ A thousand retirees from a nearly bankrupt state auto maker disrupted traffic in a central Chinese city Tuesday to protest a lack of pension payments, a human rights group reported.
The protesters from Wuhan's Light Auto Works General factory blocked streets for 2 1/2 hours before city officials agreed to give them three months of overdue pension payments, the Information Center of Human Rights and Democratic Movement in China reported.
Duty officers with city agencies, reached after hours by telephone, refused to confirm the demonstration.
The protest was the sixth this month in the ailing industrial city and is part of a nationwide wave of unrest by workers as state factories cut jobs to cope with government-ordered market reforms.
The Light Autoworks, like many state enterprises, suffered from bad management and bloated payrolls, the Information Center said.
BEIJING, November 18 (Xinhua) --China's automotive industry is working with foreign manufacturers to improve the safety records of Chinese-made vehicles, according to today's China Daily.
A seminar on automotive safety technology, jointly organized by Machinery Consultants International of the Ministry of the Machine Building Industry (MMBI) and Volvo Car Corporation, was held yesterday in Beijing.
"We need to learn from advanced auto manufacturers how better to protect drivers and passengers," said Dong Yang, MMBI science and technology division chief.
Leif Engstorm, chief representative of Volvo's China operations, said: "As the pioneer of auto safety innovation, we feel it is our responsibility to work closely with Chinese partners and safety experts to exchange views and technology".
A survey conducted by the Ministry of Public Security indicated that there were 288,000 traffic accidents in 1996, with the death toll hitting 73,700, a rise of 26 percent and 25 percent from the figures in 1992.
But the proportion of deaths per 10,000 vehicles declined from 30.2 in 1992 to 25.6 in 1996.
As the automotive industry watchdog, MMBI has issued a set of regulations governing automobile safety in the last couple of years.
It has decided to build large scale simulation facilities to carry out collision tests and promote the production of automobile safety systems.
ATLANTA (AP) --After praising DaimlerChrysler and General Motors for their child seat safety programs, the chairman of the National Transportation Safety Board criticized six other automakers for not doing enough.
Chairman Jim Hall, in a speech Monday at a national highway safety meeting in Atlanta, scolded Volvo, Mitsubishi, Kia, Subaru, Suzuki and Isuzu.
Hall said the six companies have refused to set up ''fitting stations,'' where parents can get expert advice on how to install child safety seats.
Government studies have shown that eight of 10 safety seats are installed incorrectly.
''I believe that all these car companies are run by responsible adults, and if they get the message effectively --and maybe it needs to be repeated -- they will take the steps necessary to address the No.
1 health problem for kids,'' Hall said.
Traffic accidents are the leading cause of death for children 14 and younger.
Transportation officials say properly used child seats cut the risk of fatal injuries in half.
The more common mistakes include using the wrong size seat and using a forward-facing seat for an infant who's not old enough to ride in one.
Volvo spokesman Soren Johansson said he wasn't sure the NTSB had even approached his company about a child-safety program, but he praised the focus of the meeting in Atlanta.
''Child safety has been on the agenda with us for years,'' Johansson said.
''It's good to see other manufacturers are now jumping on the bandwagon''.
Subaru spokesman Richard Marshall said his company sent a letter to the NTSB saying it would like to cooperate in a child seat safety program if guidelines could be worked out.
Mitsubishi spokesman Kim Custer said his company has done a series of campaigns about child passenger safety.
Representatives of the three other companies singled out by Hall did not return phone calls seeking comment Monday.
Hall praised a DaimlerChrysler program launched last month that allows adults driving any make of vehicle to make appointments at DaimlerChrysler dealerships to see if their child seat is properly installed.
He also praised General Motors, which has had a long-standing partnership with the National Safe Kids Campaign to hold car seat checkups.
''This is a viable first step taken by two of our major auto manufacturers to change the safety culture on our highways and to put the focus on our kids,'' Hall said.
He said Ford Motor Co.
officials told him Sunday that they plan to announce a major car-seat program soon.
Hall said BMW, Honda, Nissan and Saab are still deciding what sort of commitment they will make.
Toyota and Volkswagen have said they will encourage dealers to set up fitting stations, but they haven't committed any money to the effort, Hall said.
Hall also called on states to strengthen and enforce child passenger protection laws.
He said children should be in child restraints up to age 4, in booster seats to age 8 and in the back seat at all times.
''However, not one state currently has a comprehensive child passenger protection law with all of these requirements,'' Hall said.
''There must be zero tolerance for unbuckled children''.
Car crash fatalities for children ages 5-9 increased by 23 percent from 1982 to 1998.
In the same time period, fatalities for children up to 4 years old decreased by 8 percent.
----- On the Net: National Safe Kids Campaign: http://www.safekids.org DaimlerChrysler Fit For a Kid program: http://www.fitforakid.org National Highway Traffic Safety Administration: http://nhtsa.dot.gov
TRENTON, N.J.
(AP) --Drivers who have spent the last 15 years ignoring the state's seat belt law, listen up: The chance of getting hit with a $20 fine is growing.
On Monday, police officers throughout New Jersey will have the authority to stop drivers who are not wearing seat belts.
Previously, officers issued summonses only after stopping drivers for other reasons --such as speeding -- and found them or their front-seat passengers without seat belts.
''We're taking a very big step in reducing the death and disability caused by motor-vehicle accidents in New Jersey,'' said Assemblyman Herb Conaway, D-Burlington, a sponsor of the measure Gov.
Christie Whitman signed into law in January.
''This isn't about punishment''.
Conaway, who is a doctor, said the change also will benefit children, who are the most vulnerable to injury in automobile accidents.
''By enforcing that requirement, we know the percentage of adults who wear seat belts will go up, but more importantly, the number of children will also go up,'' Conaway said.
The Seat Belt Safety Coalition of New Jersey has said the state's 62 percent compliance rate for seat belt use in the state falls below the national average of 68 percent.
Conaway said the council's statistics show children are belted in only 20 percent of the time when adults they ride with are not.
That figure rises to about 90 percent when adults wear their seat belts, Conaway said.
The AAA New Jersey Automobile Club reports that 60 percent of children killed in automobile accidents weren't wearing seat belts.
The safety coalition predicts the greater enforcement will save up to 50 lives and prevent nearly 2,900 serious injuries per year.
''It must be once a week that I have to tell a family member that someone died because they weren't wearing a seat belt,'' Dr.
Jennifer Wailer, a trauma physician and chairwoman of the seat belt coalition, told The Press of Atlantic City in Sunday's editions.
''I can tell you it's very tiring, because this is preventable''.
The New Jersey chapter of the National Motorists Association opposed the change, arguing that it would be difficult to enforce and that the number of traffic deaths on New Jersey roads reached a 20-year low in 1999.
The current fine of $20 will remain unchanged and offenders will not be subject to Division of Motor Vehicles points.
OTTAWA, October 26 (Xinhua) --The Canadian government has told automakers to improve airbag safety or face new regulations as early as the next fall.
The government wants automakers to change airbag design voluntarily for 1998 models, make airbags to deploy with less force, and not to deploy at speeds as low as they do now.
"We must work together urgently to minimize the associated risks," Canadian Transport Minister David Anderson said in a letter to automakers.
"If the cooperation isn't there, we would have to regulate," Anderson warned.
Auto airbags were introduced in the late 1980s to reduce accident injuries to drivers and passengers.
They have since saved an estimated 100 lives in Canada.
However, airbags have also been implicated in the deaths of three Canadians, according to today's Financial Post newspaper.
Now, airbags only meet specifications set by the United States, where they are tested on dummies that do not wear belts, because only 60 percent of Americans regularly wear seat belts.
In Canada, 92 percent drivers and passengers wear belts.
But the airbags are deployed with the same force as in the United States, which can kill or hurt people who are not sitting properly.
In one case, a Canadian passenger was leaning over to adjust the radio when an airbag blasted him back into his seat and killed him, the paper said.
There was a time when auto makers could not seem to sell safety to customers.
How the times have changed.
Now some manufacturers are almost playing one-upmanship in the safety world.
Volvo has become a name synonymous with safe vehicles, but other makers are saying, ``Hey, Volvo's not the only company making safe vehicles''.
Saab, which has won Swedish awards for safety, has decided not to take a back seat.
It is letting people know it has built, and continues to build, safe vehicles.
At a presentation, Saab engineers showed how &UR; &LR; the company builds cars not for government-mandated crash tests but for ``real life'' situations, with crumple zones within the vehicle effective if the car is hit on an angle, not just straight on as in federal tests.
BMW and Mercedes-Benz are also getting out the message.
Mercedes has developed a number of safety features over the years that the company freely allows others to copy.
When it comes to a safe vehicle, driving a Mercedes has been compared to driving a tank.
It's a solid vehicle.
Ford is promoting its Windstar minivan as a safe vehicle.
It received the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration's five-star award in crash test ratings.
The only other minivan to receive the award is the '98 Toyota Sienna.
Windstar offers such added features as standard foam and cushioning in the ceiling and window pillars to help reduce head injuries in a crash.
The Ford minivan comes with two options for even safer driving: side airbags designed for front-seat passengers to cushion both the head and torso in a side crash, and a reverse-sensing system that starts beeping when the bumper is 5.9 feet away from an obstacle and sounds more frequently as the vehicle gets closer to the object.
The beeping is heard only inside the minivan.
Almost all cars and most trucks now have dual front air bags as standard equipment.
More air bags, though, are on the way.
Since their introduction a couple of years ago, side airbags are beginning to show up in more and more vehicles.
The bags are mounted either in the front door panels or on the side of the front seats.
With the controversy over injuries and, in some cases, deaths as the result of airbag deployments, a number of vehicles now are equipped with ``second generation'' bags.
These units tend not to explode with the force of earlier versions.
Another recent change came about because of injuries and deaths to children caused by air bags activating in the front seat.
Many trucks, which tend to have only one seat, are now equipped with key-operated shut offs for the front passenger side air bag to prevent such injuries.
Mercedes-Benz is now offering its Baby-Smart seat system in all models.
When a baby seat that Mercedes offers is placed in the front, a sensor deactivates the air bag on that side of the car.
This year, Mercedes-Benz and Volvo added air bag ``curtains'' to some models.
The curtains cover just about the entire door.
BMW offers a tube-like airbag that extends across the top of the front doors to help protect the heads of front-seat passengers.
As of Sept.
1, manufacturers were required to add extra padding around windows to protect against head injuries.
The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration said the new curtain-style airbags are innovative technology that surpass the extra padding ruling.
Side-impact airbags have already found their way into low-priced cars such as the Toyota Corolla.
Some luxury makers are also adding these for rear seat passengers.
For true safety, however, the use of seat belts to hold driver and passengers in place is a key element.
Relying on the air bags alone won't do the trick.
Seat belts have also been greatly improved both for comfort and for holding one in place in the event of a sudden stop.
Some makers are giving added protection to avoid whiplash injuries.
Volvo has a new whiplash Protection System allowing the seat backrest and head restraint to shift backward during rear-end collisions.
The system, Volvo says, reduces the force resulting from rear impact by 50 percent.
Saab also offers a similar system.
Many luxury vehicles are providing driver-systems that sense steering and traction conditions and automatically adjust to prevent spinouts.
BMW is including one in its new 3-Series.
Antilock brakes have been hailed as almost more important in preventing accidents than airbags.
The brakes are intended to prevent cars from skidding on slippery surfaces during a sudden stop and to aid in stopping faster.
The problem with antilock brakes is many people don't know how to use them.
Unlike regular brakes, which many drivers learned to pump in emergencies, antilock brakes do the pumping automatically.
Drivers pumping antilock brakes make them less effective.
Mercedes-Benz now has a system called Brake-Assist that uses a computer to determine when the use of the brakes is an emergency.
When this situation occurs, the computer automatically adds extra pressure to the brakes.
Mercedes says stopping distances can be reduced by up to 45 percent.
Without proper and well-maintained tires on the vehicle, no brake is going to stop the car or truck effectively.
Having the right tires for your make and model and having them properly inflated are very important, in even the simplest of stops.
Corvette was one of the first to offer a device that warns of low air pressure.
The feature can now be found on other General Motors makes.
The system is tied to the antilock brake system.
When a sensor detects a loss of air, it triggers a warning light on the instrument panel indicating which tire is low.
Stopping by the side of the road to repair a flat tire can be one of the most dangerous things a motorist can do There are too many reports of motorists changing tires being struck by a passing vehicle.
Some '99s are coming with tires that are capable of running for a while with a complete loss of air _ long enough to find help or a safe place off the highway to change the tire.
Getting a better grip on the road is what all-wheel-drive is about.
With AWD _ not four-wheel-drive _ power is shifted to the wheel or wheels needing it most.
Even if traction is lost on three wheels, new systems from Jeep and Mercedes will shift the power to the one wheel with traction, keeping the vehicle from skidding on ice or snow.
AWD, once a feature associated with sport-utility vehicles, is now available in sedans and wagons from Subaru, Volvo, and Mercedes.
Another new safety feature expected to be adapted by many manufacturers is blue-tint headlights designed to give drivers better road sight at night.
High-intensity discharge, or HID, headlights illuminate by creating an electric arc between two electrodes in a bulb filled with xenon gas.
These new lights have been designed to help older drivers see better.
OK, how many ways can you say ``sport utility''?
Plenty, would seem to be the answer as more car makers add sport utility models to their lineup.
And, there are hints that even more makers are about to enter the competition.
Lexus added to its '99 sport utility lineup earlier this year with the RX 300.
Now, Cadillac joins in with the Escalade, Suzuki adds the Grand Vitara, and there's even one from Quigley.
Quigley? Well, more about that later.
Volkswagen and Porsche are planning a joint venture, BMW is said to be working on one, Saab is looking for one, Saturn is giving thoughts to having one and Daewoo, which just entered the American market, reportedly has one in its future.
Jeep certainly isn't sitting by.
It has an all-new Grand Cherokee that's bigger, roomier, more powerful, and with a new all-wheel-drive train.
Reportedly the only things being picked up from the '98 version are 127 screws.
If there are not already a lot of choices in models, consider, too, that not all sport utility vehicles are alike.
Which means anyone looking for a SUV has a lot of shopping ahead _ not just for price, but for features as well.
Do you want full-time four-wheel drive, or do you really want all-wheel drive?
Do you want a low range for off-road adventure, or a choice of two-wheel, four-wheel drive?
Do you want room to spare?
Do you want to feel the ruts or ride in carlike comfort?
How high off the road do you want to be?
How easy is it to shift between drives?
What's the noise level inside like?
How does it feel going around a corner?
(Some SUVs, especially some of the smaller ones, give the feeling of an impending rollover.
If it doesn't feel right, don't go for it).
These are questions you should answer before putting your money down.
Surveys have shown that more than 95 percent of sport-utility owners never go off-road.
They simply use them for shopping, commuting, hauling the kids, a boat or a trailer.
Still, for auto dealers, a SUV or two on the lot is a must.
That's one reason Cadillac, for the first time in its 96-year history, is putting its name on a truck.
Sales of the Lincoln Navigator were too much for Cadillac to bear, it needed something to keep its flock in the Cadillac tent.
Enter the Cadillac Escalade.
The Escalade is basically an even fancier, smoother-riding version of the Chevrolet Tahoe and GMC Yukon and Denali.
It's not as huge as the Lincoln Navigator but it has plenty of power in its 255 horsepower engine, and can make grand music with its Bose Acoustimass sound system.
The Jeep Grand Cherokee, its fans say, leaves almost nothing to desire.
The new Grand Cherokee may look a lot like the old, but its a far different riding, handling, all-around vehicle.
Some have reported it outclasses the Mercedes M-Class, and Chrysler reportedly was going to promote that, until they became part of the Mercedes family.
Make your own comparisons.
There's just about nothing Chrysler didn't change on the '99.
There's a new engine, new all-wheel-drive system, more room, new seats, new transmission, well, it's all new.
Even the spare tire has been taken out of the cargo area and placed under the vehicle.
Chrysler hasn't missed a trick _ it spend $2.65 billion, including $750 million in plant preparation.
The new Quadra-Drive system is designed to keep the Jeep going even if three wheels lose traction.
It has a new suspension designed for better ride and handling.
And its new 16-valve, 4.7-liter V-8 is said to offer better mileage, and 30 percent less emissions.
Add to that a long list of luxury items, including dual climate zones, and you have quite a vehicle to go just about anywhere.
The Laredo version starts at $26,220, the Limited at $34,415 for the four-wheel drive version.
The luxury market for SUVs is growing.
General Motors added the Denali last spring, loading it with lots of amenities to set it apart from the GMC Yukon.
Its one-price comes with just about everything.
The same is true of GMC's new top-of-the-line, everything-included Envoy, which has features not available in any other GM SUV product.
It's nicely styled and equipped.
While lots of manufacturers are citing the ``carlike'' ride of their SUVs, GM is stressing the ``trucklike'' strength of their models, which may have a carlike ride, but are built on truck frames.
Lexus entered the SUV market last March with the RX300 ($31,500), and like other Lexus products, shows a lot of innovation along with comfort features.
The RX300 raises the question of what is a SUV?
This new entry to the market certainly doesn't look like a sport utility, it rides more like a car (it is built on a Camry frame), and it lacks a low-range gear for true off-road driving.
But it has all the other SUV attributes _ high seating, all-wheel drive, and roomy interior.
It also gets better mileage than most SUVs _ around 19 miles to the gallon.
Lexus also offers the LX470 ($58,500), a full-size, full-time 4wd with V-8 power that is new this year, replacing the LX450.
The vehicle is similar to the Toyota Land Cruiser.
The new vehicles are aimed at becoming the ``King of 4WD,'' according to Toyota.
The vehicles have a new 32-valve, 4.7-liter V-8 that offers a 7 percent fuel gain, a new Automatic Height Control system allowing the driver to raise the body by up to 2 inches at the push of a button, a new heating system, better stability, and a spacious interior.
Winning accolades since its '98 introduction is the Mercedes-Benz M-Class sport utility.
The ML320 ($34,950) has been cited for its ride, safety, ruggedness, performance, fuel economy, usability and price _ it's in the same range as a top-of-the-line Ford Explorer or Jeep Grand Cherokee.
Consumer Reports puts it at the top of its SUV list.
The only problem with the V-6 powered ML320 is availability _ it's a long wait for the Alabama-produced vehicle.
This year, Mercedes adds a second model, the ML430 with V-8 power.
Some of the nice touches of the M-Class include bumpers set at the same level as a car (unlike other SUVs, the Mercedes bumper won't end up in a car's body, causing additional damage during a collision), BabySmart automatic child seat recognition (a system that deactivates the front passenger-side airbag if a child is in a booster seat in front), and a new Power Skyview Top option that offers a huge roof opening (about four-feet by three-feet wide).
Ford is still king of the hill when it comes to sales of its Explorer and near twin, Mercury Mountaineer.
For '99 the Explorer adds a Reverse Sensing System (a whole-range rear warning system to alert drivers of objects when backing up), side airbags, Homelink (a remote control for opening garage doors, lights, etc), Travelnote, an electronic message organizer that records and plays messages.
On an environmental note, both the Explorer and Expedition (Mountaineer and Navigator, as well) are now low-emission vehicles, producing 40 percent less smog-forming emissions than before.
The Expedition, Ford's huge SUV, adds an optional power-adjustable brake and accelerator pedals that can be adjusted up to 3 inches, a plus for shorter drivers.
These features can also be found in the Lincoln Navigator and the Mercury Mountaineer.
In the lower price range, Suzuki is out to set a new standard for mini-sport-utility vehicles.
The Grand Vitara ($21,429) will be the first in its class to have a V-6 engine, and with its body built onto a steel ladder frame like larger SUVs, this vehicle is a true off-roader, complete with a four-wheel drive system.
It includes a two-speed transfer case with low range for climbing and descending steep hills.
The inside of the Grand Vitara is said to almost equal that of the Jeep Cherokee.
The Grand Vitara is joined by two four-cylinder versions: the Suzuki Vitara and the Chevrolet Tracker.
These will be available as two-door convertible or four-door hardtop.
The V-6 will only be available at Suzuki dealers.
Kia, a Korean company, has slowly been making its way to the East Coast and arrived in New England this fall.
Along with it comes the Kia Sportage, which is designed to appeal to Generation X in style, and more importantly, in price.
The Kia Sportage starts at $14,445, a thousand or more dollars less than competitors such as the Isuzu Amigo and Toyota RAV4.
The Kia will be available as a two-door convertible and four-door model.
Ever since Consumer Reports labeled the 1996 Isuzu Trooper II and the 1988 Suzuki Samurai as being unacceptable for, in Consumer Union's eye, a tendency to roll over in emergency tests, consumers have become aware that this could be a problem in any SUV.
SUVs sit high above the road and, therefore, tend to lean more in turns than lower profile automobiles.
The new Land Rover Discovery Series II offers a computer-assisted system that should allay this unsettling feeling.
The Discovery features ACE _ active cornering enhancement _ which uses hydraulic levers that counter the lateral tilt of the vehicle's body.
This is the only vehicle sold in America that offers such a system.
The Land Rover Discovery II ($35,000) is the second generation of this model.
The new model is slightly lower and six inches longer than last year's.
The added space goes for cargo and rear-seat passengers.
The new model also comes with another first _ an electronic hill descent control that supplements engine braking on steep hills by automatically applying the brakes as needed.
The Discovery is also four inches wider than the '98, and has a V-8 engine that has added power and torque.
Other SUVs already on the market include the Acura SLX ($38,300), Chevrolet Blazer ($21,600), the monstrous Chevrolet/GMC Suburban ($25,500), Dodge Durango ($27,000), available with an optional 5.9-liter V-8, the biggest engine in its class; GMC Jimmy ($21,800), Honda CR-V ($18,300), Honda Passport ($$23,800), Infiniti QX4 ($35,550), Isuzu Rodeo ($17,900), Isuzu Trooper ($27,800), Jeep Wrangler ($14,200), Land Rover Discovery ($34,500), Land Rover Range Rover ($56,000), Mitsubishi Montero ($33,500), Mitsubishi Montero Sport ($18,100), Nissan Pathfinder ($23,900), Oldsmobile Bravada ($30,700), Subaru Forester ($18,700), Subaru Outback ($24,500), Toyota 4Runner ($20,500), Toyota RAV4 ($15,400) and Toyota Land Cruiser ($45,900) Oh yes, what's a Quigley?
Quigley is a company that has been converting vans and trucks to four-wheel-drive.
Now it is marketing a four-wheel-drive based on a full-size van through Ford, Chevrolet, and GMC dealers.
LOS ANGELES, January 12 (Xinhua) --Ford Motor Company plans to add what it calls a rollover protection system in the fall of 2001 to its sport utility vehicles (SUVs) and light trucks in an effort to reduce fatalities, according to reports from the world's second biggest auto maker.
The new system, unveiled at the Detroit auto show Wednesday, includes an airbag-like curtain on each side of the vehicle and is a response to the federal government's revelation that almost half the people who die in light trucks and SUVs die in rollover accidents.
"Its principal purpose is to help keep occupants inside the vehicle and protected," said Helen Petrauskas, vice president of environmental and safety engineering for Ford.
"We've looked at the most threatening current driving conditions and developed new technologies to improve the protection for our SUV drivers and their families," she said.
While some auto makers, including Mercedes, Volvo and BMW have air bag curtains that inflate across the car windows and could potentially help during a rollover, experts believe Ford's is the first that is designed specifically for rollover protection.
More than 9,400 people died in rollover crashes in 1997, according to the latest year statistics available.
Forty-seven percent of all fatalities in light trucks and SUVs result from rollovers, according to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, while 22 percent of car deaths involve rollovers.
Most often rollover deaths involve passengers being ejected from the vehicle.
Government officials and auto makers have repeatedly said that wearing seat belts is the most important single way to prevent passengers from being ejected in a rollover crash.
Forget ``boxy,'' put ``utilitarian'' and ``practical'' out of your mind and get ready to change almost all your perceptions about the venerable Volvo.
Welcome to the all-new, awe-inspiring, way-cool Volvo S80 sedan, the biggest and best and least Volvo-looking Volvo of all time.
Due in dealer showrooms as early as mid-September, this new front-drive, full-size sedan will a) alienate some Volvo diehards who think boxy is just the thing, and b) draw a whole lot of new buyers into the Volvo fold, people who just couldn't bear to buy the type of car associated with middle-age mothers.
The S80, with a price range of $40,000 to $43,000, will be the most expensive production Volvo ever.
But anyone who drives the vehicle will immediately put it in the same class as European luxury cars such as the BMW 5-series, Mercedes-Benz E-class and the Audi A6.
Volvo has gone upscale with this car, and you can bet it will be a force in the marketplace even against such heady competition.
Why? That's easy.
Take Volvo's long-standing reputation for safety, quality and longevity, add a full measure of luxury, and you've got a package that the consumer in the $40,000-sedan class has been yearning for.
Safety, which has always been Volvo's primary focus, takes no back seat in the new S80.
This car is, without a doubt, the safest Volvo ever built, thanks to innovations including computerized stability and traction control, advanced antilock braking, new seats that offer much-improved whiplash protection in rear-end crashes, and the ``inflatable curtain,'' Volvo's version of the side airbag system to protect the driver and front passenger in the event of a T-bone collision.
Although Volvo will offer the S80 with seven different engines, including two inline six-cylinders and five five-cylinders, only the six-cylinders will be sold in the United States.
The top-of-the-line engine will be the T6, a 2.8-liter, inline six-cylinder with double turbochargers, rated at a whopping 272 horsepower.
This engine's power is on par with that of 4-liter V-8s in competitive makes and Volvo will also sell the vehicle with a five-speed manual transmission.
A General Motors four-speed automatic is standard for Volvos with six-cylinder engines, and will be the one most buyers choose.
It is so smooth-shifting that it's virtually seamless.
The second engine destined for the U.S. market will be a normally aspirated (non-turbo) 2.9-liter inline six-cylinder rated at 204 horsepower.
This engine is expected to be the biggest seller; from my experience, this has all the power most buyers will ever need.
Passengers will enjoy the ride in the S80 almost as much as the driver enjoys driving it.
It's smooth and cushy but with enough road feel left to give the driver some fun on curves and turns.
The rear seat is roomy enough for three adults to ride comfortably, even on long trips, and the front bucket seats are so comfy you may want to order a couple for your living room.
The S80's distinct, modern design copies no other vehicle, yet it looks as contemporary as any of its competition from Europe or Japan.
The design is the product of Volvo's California studio, led by U.S. designer Doug Frasher.
Production of the S80 is under way at Volvo's plant in Gothenburg, Sweden.
The official on-sale date is Oct.
12, but dealers are taking orders, Volvo officials said.
This vehicle is so important for Volvo's future _ the company's first serious attempt to built a prestige vehicle based on the traditional Volvo safety and durability _ that about 25,000 dealers and Volvo employees from around the world have been brought to the Gothenburg headquarters during the past several weeks to learn about the S80, according to officials of Volvo Cars of North America.
NEW FORD MINI-SUV: Ford plans to introduce an all-new compact sport-utility vehicle for model year 2001 that will compete against the Toyota RAV4, Kia Sportage and Honda CR-V.
Smaller than the midsize Explorer, the new model will be built in Claycomo, Mo.
, where Ford makes Contour and Mercury Mystique compact sedans.
Production of those slow-selling vehicles _ if they are still on the market by then _ will be transferred to Mexico, the company says.
Ford's Japanese partner Mazda will sell its own version of the new sport-utility, the first SUV model shared with Ford since the Mazda Navajo, a two-door version of the Explorer, was discontinued three years ago.
_ AT A GLANCE: 1999 Volvo S80 sedan THE PACKAGE: Full-size, four-door, five-passenger, inline six-cylinder- powered, front-drive sedan, an all-new vehicle that will serve as Volvo's flagship car around the world.
HIGHLIGHTS: Outstanding safety, quality and Volvo dependability in a design that breaks the boxy Volvo mold; high-performance turbocharged engine is optional; excellent ride and handling; roomy interior; lots of convenience features.
NEGATIVES: No station-wagon version is planned.
Major competitors: BMW 5-series, Mercedes-Benz E-class, Lexus GS 300, Saab 9-5, Audi A- 6, Acura 3.5 TL.
EPA FUEL ECONOMY: Not available.
PRICE RANGE, WELL-EQUIPPED: $40,000 to $43,000 plus transportation.
ON THE ROAD RATING: A-plus.
_ (G.
Chambers Williams III writes on transportation issues for the Fort Worth Star-Telegram.
His mailing address is Star-Telegram/Northeast, 3201 Airport Freeway, Suite 108, Bedford, Texas 76021; his E-mail address is chambers(at)star-telegram.com.
Fax: (817) 685-3883.
Check out his Wheelin' new-car review column weekly on the Internet at ww.netarrant.net/today/news/opinions/necol.htm.
Visit the Star-Telegram's online services on the World Wide Web: www.star-telegram.com)
WASHINGTON (AP) --The government announced new air bag standards Friday that seek to improve protection of children and small adults.
Critics contend larger adults who don't wear seat belts could be put at greater risk.
The new rule overhauls the government's standards for air bags, which to date are credited with saving more than 5,000 lives and blamed for at least 158 deaths.
Under the new standards, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration will require air bags to protect vehicle occupants in a 25 mph crash test, the level supported by automakers, rather than a test at 30 mph favored by some consumer advocates.
The 25 mph standard will be phased in over three years, starting with 2004 model year vehicles.
Most air bag deaths have involved unrestrained children and small adults in low-speed crashes, victims most often of air bags that deployed so forcefully they caused neck injuries.
The 25 mph test will not require the air bags to inflate as forcefully as a 30 mph test.
''At the end of the day, we focused on the most vulnerable and the most at-risk of being killed by the air bags that were supposed to benefit them,'' Transportation Secretary Rodney Slater said.
Some consumer groups say the new standard will put more adults at risk because the bags will not be designed to deploy with enough force to protect unbelted larger adults.
''We need a 30 mph standard because people are more likely to be killed or seriously injured in higher-speed crashes, and this is where air bags have saved the most lives,'' said Joan Claybrook, president of Public Citizen, Ralph Nader's nonprofit group.
NHTSA required a 30 mph test until 1997, when worries about air bags injuring motorists caused the agency to approve a rule that temporarily allowed automakers to use a 25 mph test.
Rather than change the test, Claybrook said automakers should install dual-power air bags that would inflate at different speeds depending on the severity of impact and size of the occupant.
The real reason the auto industry wants the 25 mph test, Claybrook said, is that popular sport utility vehicles cannot meet the 30 mph standard because of stiff designs that do not absorb impact as well as cars.
Lance Roberts of the Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers rejected that argument.
If it were true, he said, the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety, the American Trauma Society and the National Transportation Safety Board would not support the 25 mph test as the safer alternative.
''It's certainly not about saving money or about protecting any classification of vehicle,'' Roberts said.
''This rule is going to go so much further in enhancing vehicle safety, it's unprecedented''.
NHTSA also will require vehicles to be tested using a family of dummies --an average-size man, a small woman and 1-, 3- and 6-year-old children.
Previous tests involved only average-size men.
The new regulations also attempt to recreate real-world conditions by placing child dummies in child seats on the passenger seat and in unbelted sitting, kneeling, standing and lying positions.
NHTSA estimates the new standards will increase costs by less than $100 per vehicle.
----- On the Net: National Highway Traffic Safety Administration: http://www.nhtsa.dot.gov
WASHINGTON (AP) --With federal regulators pondering whether they should start rating child safety seats, a major automaker began offering parents a free seat checkup service, regardless of what kind of car they have.
Child safety seats prevent thousands of deaths and injuries annually, but federal officials and safety experts say a large share of those in use are not installed correctly, posing a possible hazard to children riding in them.
DaimlerChrysler Corp.
began taking appointments Wednesday at 400 dealerships in 80 cities for child seat checkups.
Under the program, which will grow to 1,000 dealerships by year's end, even adults driving a competitor's vehicle can ask DaimlerChrysler technicians if a child seat is properly installed and children are buckled in properly.
Every year, parents struggle to install about 70 models of child car seats in hundreds of types of cars with different back seats.
Studies show more than 80 percent of child seats are improperly installed.
The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration launched its look at ways to improve child seat safety, including a possible rating system, with a public hearing on Wednesday.
Australia and Europe test safety seats and provide parents the results of those tests, while Japan is considering a rating system, noted Stephen R.
Kratzke, NHTSA associate administrator for safety performance.
If a rating system is developed it needs to include real-world performance, not just crash-test results, Stephanie M.
Tombrello of SafetyBeltSafe U.S.A. said.
"A rating system that is simply a star system can hinder safety because parents stop asking questions," she said.
Parents need instructions in correct installation, Tombrello said.
Kathleen Weber of the University of Michigan Medical School suggested the possibility of a weighted rating system that included explanations of tradeoffs.
"Not all test data are of equal importance," she said, noting that measurements of head movement, chest acceleration and knee movement in a crash are among pieces of information collected.
Robert B.
Waller, Jr.
, who represents car seat manufacturers, said a single rating system could be misleading.
A single rating could lead manufacturers to sacrifice in one area, such as compatibility with various vehicles, in favor of some other factor that weighs more in the rating, said Waller, of the Juvenile Products Manufacturers Association.
That could result in angry consumers, frustrated that what they thought was the "best" seat won't fit in their car, he said.
He suggested improved instructions and warning labels for the seats, adding that some current mandatory labeling requires a 12th grade education to understand.
Another safety agency, the National Transportation Safety Board, called attention to the problem of wrongly installed seats, urging creation of a network of permanent "fitting stations" for child seats that the government, automakers and private safety agencies would operate jointly.
NTSB Chairman Jim Hall urged automakers to also to offer checkups as a permanent feature in every dealership.
Traffic accidents are the leading cause of death for children 14 and younger.
Properly used child seats cut the risk of fatal injuries in half, government officials say, but inspections indicate many parents do not know they are using the seats incorrectly.
Susan Cischke, DaimlerChrysler's vice president of regulatory affairs, said their research found that 96 percent of drivers with child seats believed the seats were installed properly --even though less than 20 percent were.
Cischke said some of the more common mistakes were getting the wrong sized-seat for the child and moving an infant into a forward-facing seat too quickly.
Even before the NTSB recommendation, General Motors Corp.
financed periodic checkups at their dealerships with help from a private safety group, the National Safe Kids Campaign.
Under the program, more than 45,000 child seats have been inspected since 1996.
And starting this month, GM will have a minivan in each state that will be used to conduct car seat clinics at different sites.
But until DaimlerChrysler's announcement, no automaker offered parents the chance to make an appointment at dealerships on such a wide scale.
DaimlerChrysler said parents who want an appointment for a checkup should call 1-877-FIT-4-A-KID or visit the Internet site www.fitforakid.org.
WASHINGTON (AP) --A top federal safety official is urging automakers to design cars with child safety in mind first.
``It's time for the automobile manufacturers to put kids first in the design of their vehicles, and to focus on the back seat where kids sit most of the time,'' Jim Hall, chairman of the National Transportation Safety Board, said Wednesday in a telephone interview.
``Unfortunately, in the past kids have been just an afterthought in terms of the design of safety features for an automobile,'' he said.
Hall is sending that message to automakers in a speech he was delivering today at the World Traffic Safety Symposium in New York City, an event being held in conjunction with the New York International Auto Show.
In his prepared text, Hall warned: ``We need look no further than the first-generation air bag to understand the consequences of not doing so''.
Air bags inflating in low-speed crashes have been blamed for killing 131 people, including 73 children.
On Wednesday, Hall sent the speech to top auto executives along with a letter urging them ``to discuss with your peers the need to reverse the trend of motor vehicle crashes being the leading cause of death among young Americans''.
Traffic crashes are the leading cause of death for children between ages 5 and 15.
This decade, more than 60,000 children, infants to teen-agers, have died in traffic crashes.
When children are in the car, they ride in the back seat about 70 percent of the time, according to the agency's analysis of federal crash data from 1996 and 1997.
Hall said crash tests that automakers must pass for federal safety compliance should include child dummies in the back seats to learn how well the vehicles protect them from head and neck injuries.
The back seat is now empty in those crash tests.
The Safety Board also has recommended automakers: --nstall shoulder belts in all rear seating positions in cars and light trucks, including the rear center seat, where they are often missing.
--ake the shoulder belts in rear seats adjustable so that they can be lowered in height to properly fit across children's chests rather than rise up at their necks.
Most autos have adjustable shoulder belts only in the front seats.
--tock more vehicles with built-in child seats.
In a speech in January, Hall announced the safety board was recommending a nationwide network of fitting stations to check that child seats are properly installed to protect children in auto crashes.
More than 80 percent of child seats are installed incorrectly, studies show.
DETROIT (AP) --Mercedes-Benz has recalled 6,000 high-tech child seats that automatically turn off passenger-side air bags when installed, saying a flaw in the system might keep the air bags turned on.
The system was designed to reduce the dangers of small children in child seats near air bags.
Safety experts recommend that small infants ride in rear-facing child seats, but also strongly recommend that rear-facing infant seats never be placed in front of an air bag.
At least 15 infants have been killed this way by air bags since 1994, according to the U.S.
Department of Transportation.
The BabySmart seats send and receive signals from two antennas in the seat cushion.
Air bags in some Mercedes-Benz models are supposed to recognize that a BabySmart seat has been installed and turn off the passenger air bag.
But Mercedes-Benz said Tuesday that if the child seat is pushed forward when the seat back is leaning toward the dashboard, the passenger airbag might not turn off as designed.
Drivers would know the system was not working only because an ``airbag off'' light would stay dark.
Mercedes-Benz said there have been four reports that the indicator light was off, but no reports of accidents or injuries.
The company recommended the seats not be used and that children sit in the back seat until the problem is fixed.
Mercedes-Benz said all known owners of BabySmart Infant and Booster child seats were being notified, and special posters would be hung in Mercedes-Benz dealerships.
Mercedes dealers will exchange the seats for free.
The recall does not affect Toddler seats.
DETROIT (AP) --Ford Motor Co.
will install a device that warns unbuckled drivers with an intermittent chime until they buckle their seat belts.
The Belt-Minder system will be used throughout Ford's U.S. product line starting later this year.
President Jac Nasser announced the system Monday at the North American International Auto Show's media preview.
A sensor in the belt buckle determines if the driver has buckled up; if not, a red light on the dashboard goes on and an intermittent chime sounds until the belt is latched.
On most cars and trucks, a chime and light go on only when the ignition is turned on.
``We think it will improve safety belt usage tremendously,'' Nasser said.
Drivers who don't want to wear their belts can disable the intermittent chime by buckling, then unbuckling their belt.
Nasser said seat belts are ``the most effective safety device there is,'' but that many who occasionally fail to buckle up say they simply forget or are too hurried.
Ford said the system eventually will be expanded to include the front passenger seat.
The No.
2 automaker said major insurance companies are considering discounts for those who own or lease vehicles equipped with the Belt-Minder.
WASHINGTON (AP) --DaimlerChrysler AG is establishing a new service at a quarter of its dealerships to advise parents on how to install car seats to protect children.
DaimlerChrysler is the first automaker to accept a federal agency's challenge by creating a permanent free service using trained personnel to help customers fit child seats.
The company will spend more than $10 million annually and the service will be available at about 1,000 dealerships, company officials said Wednesday.
More than 80 percent of child seats are improperly installed in autos.
Properly used child seats cut the risk of fatal injuries in half, according to government statistics.
By next year, DaimlerChrysler will have the capacity to conduct 800,000 inspections annually to make sure children are buckled properly in child seats and child seats are properly installed in both new and older DaimlerChrysler vehicles, the company officials said.
By comparison, the National Safety Council estimates 30,000 child seats a year are being inspected now at community events nationwide.
DaimlerChrysler co-chairman Robert Eaton was announcing the initiative today at a news conference.
Also involved is the child seat manufacturer Fisher-Price and the nonprofit National Safety Council.
The company's move follows a recommendation by the National Transportation Safety Board in January that a nationwide network of ``fitting stations'' for child seats be established to prevent the deaths of children in automobile accidents.
Each year, frustrated parents struggle to install about 70 models of child car seats in hundreds of types of cars with different shapes of back seats, meaning there are ``potentially 100,000 different ways to confuse the average consumer,'' NTSB Chairman Jim Hall says.
This decade, more than 60,000 children have died in traffic crashes.
When Hall recommended the fitting stations, he envisioned them across the United States at vehicle inspection sites, motor vehicle administration offices, fire stations and automobile dealerships.
Hall had said the initiative should be financed out of government transportation dollars, but he invited other groups and businesses to get involved.
So far, only DaimlerChrysler has come forward but other automakers are considering the proposal.
General Motors Corp.
also is considering some type of permanent fitting stations in its dealerships, spokesman Greg Martin said.
Since 1996, GM has worked with the National Safe Kids Campaign, a nonprofit group that promotes child safety, to hold weekend or daylong child safety seat checks at about 1,000 of the company's dealerships.
LOS ANGELES --The evacuation of an apartment complex Friday because of an unexploded, stolen air bag reveals what police say is a thriving, illegal trade in these car safety devices.
In L.A.'s San Fernando Valley, investigators suspect there is at least one roving gang of thieves that specializes in taking orders from body shops and then going out to steal them.
Nationwide, an estimated $50 million worth of air bags are stolen every year, accounting for 10 percent of all auto theft claims in 1997, double that of just the year before, insurance industry officials said.
``It's basically a replacement for the car stereo theft of the '80s and early '90s,'' said Julie Rochman, spokeswoman for the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety, based in Arlington, Va.
``The air bags the thieves are going after are worth more than any other item in the passenger compartment''.
Following a crash, a new air bag can cost $1,000, but police said unscrupulous body shops buy stolen ones for $150 apiece and then charge $1,500, including the installation.
And removing an explosively armed air bag, particularly if it is done in a hurry, can leave a car in bad shape.
``When air bags are stolen, they damage the steering wheel, the dash or cut the wiring harness,'' said Frank Tomota, a service consultant at West Valley Toyota in Northridge.
Insurance premiums are not expected to rise because officials said the growing cost of air bag thefts is offset by an overall decline in auto thefts.
The real losers are the motorists because with every theft, they must pay the deductible amount, arrange for the repairs and risk driving without an air bag.
The air bag that was found unexploded in Van Nuys on Friday is among the 12 or so that police said are stolen every month in the Valley.
Detectives came upon it by happenstance while making an arrest at the Royal Garden Apartments at 14625 Rayen St.
About 24 people were evacuated because the air bags contain an explosive charge that can launch its 25-pound metal casing some 80 feet, police said.
Details about the arrest were not immediately available, but police said they believe the air bag had been stolen, and that they were trying to track down the owner.
Often a group of thieves hits three or four cars on a street or parking lot and then steals from a neighbor a week or two later, said Detective Bob Graybill of the LAPD's auto-theft task force in Van Nuys.
The thieves almost always are filling an order from an auto body shop whose owner is trying to cut costs to maximize the payout from the insurance company, he said.
This can include splicing, instead of replacing, the wiring harness attached to the air bag, or in some cases not installing an air bag at all.
``The car looks good and the customer is very happy --and until he gets involved in a crash again and finds out if the air bag works or not, nobody's going to know these are used air bags the guy jury-rigged in there,'' Graybill said.
Los Angeles police are attacking the problem through stepped-up inspections of auto shops to ensure owners are licensed and have receipts for uninstalled air bags.
By a conservative estimate, 50,000 air bags were stolen in the United States in 1996, roughly triple that of 1993, said Ed Sparkman, a senior manager of vehicle support at the National Insurance Crime Bureau in Palos Hills, Ill.
That equates to a $50 million loss to the insurance industry, assuming the average replacement cost for an air bag is $1,000, he said.
The actual rate of these thefts is believed to be much higher since these statistics did not account for the commercial auto market and because theft of air bags from rental cars, often by the person renting the car, is booming, he said.
The industry and law enforcement are now mulling over ways to combat air bag theft by using a national registry of serial numbers.
Auto parts stores sell anti-theft devices for drivers' air bags, which attach to the steering wheel or special bolts that make it more difficult for a thief to remove the safety device.
``It's definitely a growing problem,'' said Dave Unnewehr, a research manager with the American Insurance Association in Washington, D.C.
X X X &QL;
Federal regulators Thursday warned consumers that side air bags can kill or seriously injure children under 12 and urged manufacturers installing the devices in rear seats to let drivers decide if they want them activated.
Most auto manufacturers reacted coolly to the advisory from the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, saying side air bags used in conjunction with age-appropriate restraints significantly enhance safety.
Although BMW already allows customers to tell dealers whether they want rear seat air bags activated, a Mercedes spokesman said the company has no plans to follow suit.
``We don't believe it's in the consumer's best interests,'' said Stuart Schorr, a Mercedes spokesman.
About 7,500 people in the United States each year die from side-impact crashes and a growing number of auto manufacturers are installing side air bags as standard or optional equipment to provide greater safety.
There have been no deaths or serious injuries attributed to side air bags.
By contrast, front air bags have been blamed for at least 145 deaths since 1990.
In those cases, the impact of the bag inflating caused serious injuries.
Most of the victims were children and short people, many of whom were not wearing seat belts.
Federal officials said more than 2.4 million vehicles with front-seat side air bags are in use, but fewer than 20,000 have rear-seat air bags.
Most manufacturers are installing front-seat side air bags, but only Mercedes, Audi, BMW, and Rolls Royce are putting them in the rear seat.
In its consumer advisory, the traffic safety administration warned that side air bags can kill or seriously injure children whose head, neck, or chest are in close proximity to the air bag at the time of deployment.
Since children under 12 are supposed to be traveling in rear seats at all times, the advisory urged car manufacturers to deactivate rear side air bags before shipping vehicles to dealers.
``Purchasers who want such air bags activated, after being advised of the potential risk to out-of-position children, should be able to have them switched on by their dealers,'' the advisory said.
The agency also urged manufacturers to allow owners of vehicles with rear side air bags to bring them back to dealers to have them deactivated if the vehicle is likely to be carrying children.
The advisory noted that children under 12 should always sit in the rear seat and use age-appropriate restraints, but manufacturers and insurance industry officials said the warning failed to point out the benefits of side air bags used in conjunction with seat belts and child seats.
Indeed, in all the crash tests cited by the agency the dummies representing children were not wearing seat belts or sitting in a child safety seat.
``We think what the agency has done today is to needlessly scare people,'' said Julie Rochman, a spokesman for the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety.
She acknowledged a child lying on the rear seat with his head near the door or kneeling with his chest against the door would be in danger if the side air bag deployed.
But she said a child in those positions would be at far greater risk if the car were hit by another vehicle.
Said Schorr of Mercedes: ``For properly restrained children, side air bags are a great safety device that will save lives''.
He said Mercedes plans to contact owners of its vehicles shortly to review the benefits of side air bags used appropriately.
A BMW spokesman said the company decided to deactivate rear-seat air bags to give consumers a chance to review the pros and cons.
There was a time when auto makers could not seem to sell safety to customers.
How the times have changed.
Now some manufacturers are almost playing one-upmanship in the safety world.
Volvo has become a name synonymous with safe vehicles, but other makers are saying, ``Hey, Volvo's not the only company making safe vehicles''.
Saab, which has won Swedish awards for safety, has decided not to take a back seat.
It is letting people know it has built, and continues to build, safe vehicles.
At a presentation, Saab engineers showed how &UR; &LR; the company builds cars not for government-mandated crash tests but for ``real life'' situations, with crumple zones within the vehicle effective if the car is hit on an angle, not just straight on as in federal tests.
BMW and Mercedes-Benz are also getting out the message.
Mercedes has developed a number of safety features over the years that the company freely allows others to copy.
When it comes to a safe vehicle, driving a Mercedes has been compared to driving a tank.
It's a solid vehicle.
Ford is promoting its Windstar minivan as a safe vehicle.
It received the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration's five-star award in crash test ratings.
The only other minivan to receive the award is the '98 Toyota Sienna.
Windstar offers such added features as standard foam and cushioning in the ceiling and window pillars to help reduce head injuries in a crash.
The Ford minivan comes with two options for even safer driving: side airbags designed for front-seat passengers to cushion both the head and torso in a side crash, and a reverse-sensing system that starts beeping when the bumper is 5.9 feet away from an obstacle and sounds more frequently as the vehicle gets closer to the object.
The beeping is heard only inside the minivan.
Almost all cars and most trucks now have dual front air bags as standard equipment.
More air bags, though, are on the way.
Since their introduction a couple of years ago, side airbags are beginning to show up in more and more vehicles.
The bags are mounted either in the front door panels or on the side of the front seats.
With the controversy over injuries and, in some cases, deaths as the result of airbag deployments, a number of vehicles now are equipped with ``second generation'' bags.
These units tend not to explode with the force of earlier versions.
Another recent change came about because of injuries and deaths to children caused by air bags activating in the front seat.
Many trucks, which tend to have only one seat, are now equipped with key-operated shut offs for the front passenger side air bag to prevent such injuries.
Mercedes-Benz is now offering its Baby-Smart seat system in all models.
When a baby seat that Mercedes offers is placed in the front, a sensor deactivates the air bag on that side of the car.
This year, Mercedes-Benz and Volvo added air bag ``curtains'' to some models.
The curtains cover just about the entire door.
BMW offers a tube-like airbag that extends across the top of the front doors to help protect the heads of front-seat passengers.
As of Sept.
1, manufacturers were required to add extra padding around windows to protect against head injuries.
The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration said the new curtain-style airbags are innovative technology that surpass the extra padding ruling.
Side-impact airbags have already found their way into low-priced cars such as the Toyota Corolla.
Some luxury makers are also adding these for rear seat passengers.
For true safety, however, the use of seat belts to hold driver and passengers in place is a key element.
Relying on the air bags alone won't do the trick.
Seat belts have also been greatly improved both for comfort and for holding one in place in the event of a sudden stop.
Some makers are giving added protection to avoid whiplash injuries.
Volvo has a new whiplash Protection System allowing the seat backrest and head restraint to shift backward during rear-end collisions.
The system, Volvo says, reduces the force resulting from rear impact by 50 percent.
Saab also offers a similar system.
Many luxury vehicles are providing driver-systems that sense steering and traction conditions and automatically adjust to prevent spinouts.
BMW is including one in its new 3-Series.
Antilock brakes have been hailed as almost more important in preventing accidents than airbags.
The brakes are intended to prevent cars from skidding on slippery surfaces during a sudden stop and to aid in stopping faster.
The problem with antilock brakes is many people don't know how to use them.
Unlike regular brakes, which many drivers learned to pump in emergencies, antilock brakes do the pumping automatically.
Drivers pumping antilock brakes make them less effective.
Mercedes-Benz now has a system called Brake-Assist that uses a computer to determine when the use of the brakes is an emergency.
When this situation occurs, the computer automatically adds extra pressure to the brakes.
Mercedes says stopping distances can be reduced by up to 45 percent.
Without proper and well-maintained tires on the vehicle, no brake is going to stop the car or truck effectively.
Having the right tires for your make and model and having them properly inflated are very important, in even the simplest of stops.
Corvette was one of the first to offer a device that warns of low air pressure.
The feature can now be found on other General Motors makes.
The system is tied to the antilock brake system.
When a sensor detects a loss of air, it triggers a warning light on the instrument panel indicating which tire is low.
Stopping by the side of the road to repair a flat tire can be one of the most dangerous things a motorist can do There are too many reports of motorists changing tires being struck by a passing vehicle.
Some '99s are coming with tires that are capable of running for a while with a complete loss of air _ long enough to find help or a safe place off the highway to change the tire.
Getting a better grip on the road is what all-wheel-drive is about.
With AWD _ not four-wheel-drive _ power is shifted to the wheel or wheels needing it most.
Even if traction is lost on three wheels, new systems from Jeep and Mercedes will shift the power to the one wheel with traction, keeping the vehicle from skidding on ice or snow.
AWD, once a feature associated with sport-utility vehicles, is now available in sedans and wagons from Subaru, Volvo, and Mercedes.
Another new safety feature expected to be adapted by many manufacturers is blue-tint headlights designed to give drivers better road sight at night.
High-intensity discharge, or HID, headlights illuminate by creating an electric arc between two electrodes in a bulb filled with xenon gas.
These new lights have been designed to help older drivers see better.
WASHINGTON (AP) --The government announced new air bag standards Friday that seek to improve protection of children and small adults.
Critics contend larger adults who don't wear seat belts could be put at greater risk.
The new rule overhauls the government's standards for air bags, which to date are credited with saving more than 5,000 lives and blamed for at least 158 deaths.
Under the new standards, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration will require air bags to protect vehicle occupants in a 25 mph crash test, the level supported by automakers, rather than a test at 30 mph favored by some consumer advocates.
The 25 mph standard will be phased in over three years, starting with 2004 model year vehicles.
Most air bag deaths have involved unrestrained children and small adults in low-speed crashes, victims most often of air bags that deployed so forcefully they caused neck injuries.
The 25 mph test will not require the air bags to inflate as forcefully as a 30 mph test.
''At the end of the day, we focused on the most vulnerable and the most at-risk of being killed by the air bags that were supposed to benefit them,'' Transportation Secretary Rodney Slater said.
Some consumer groups say the new standard will put more adults at risk because the bags will not be designed to deploy with enough force to protect unbelted larger adults.
''We need a 30 mph standard because people are more likely to be killed or seriously injured in higher-speed crashes, and this is where air bags have saved the most lives,'' said Joan Claybrook, president of Public Citizen, Ralph Nader's nonprofit group.
NHTSA required a 30 mph test until 1997, when worries about air bags injuring motorists caused the agency to approve a rule that temporarily allowed automakers to use a 25 mph test.
Rather than change the test, Claybrook said automakers should install dual-power air bags that would inflate at different speeds depending on the severity of impact and size of the occupant.
The real reason the auto industry wants the 25 mph test, Claybrook said, is that popular sport utility vehicles cannot meet the 30 mph standard because of stiff designs that do not absorb impact as well as cars.
Lance Roberts of the Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers rejected that argument.
If it were true, he said, the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety, the American Trauma Society and the National Transportation Safety Board would not support the 25 mph test as the safer alternative.
''It's certainly not about saving money or about protecting any classification of vehicle,'' Roberts said.
''This rule is going to go so much further in enhancing vehicle safety, it's unprecedented''.
NHTSA also will require vehicles to be tested using a family of dummies --an average-size man, a small woman and 1-, 3- and 6-year-old children.
Previous tests involved only average-size men.
The new regulations also attempt to recreate real-world conditions by placing child dummies in child seats on the passenger seat and in unbelted sitting, kneeling, standing and lying positions.
NHTSA estimates the new standards will increase costs by less than $100 per vehicle.
----- On the Net: National Highway Traffic Safety Administration: http://www.nhtsa.dot.gov
WASHINGTON (AP) --Cars should be designed with child safety first in mind, especially in the back seat where most children ride, the head of a federal safety agency says.
Jim Hall, chairman of the National Transportation Safety Board, is taking that message to automakers in New York for the annual auto show there.
``Despite overwhelming statistics indicating the need for better protection for children, child passenger safety has been an afterthought when it comes to designing cars.
That needs to change,'' Hall said in remarks prepared for delivery Thursday at the World Traffic Safety Symposium, an event being held in conjunction with the New York International Auto Show.
``It's time to put children and their safety first in vehicle design,'' Hall said.
``We need look no further than the first-generation air bag to understand the consequences of not doing so''.
Air bags inflating in minor crashes have been blamed for killing 131 people, including 73 children.
Hall said crash tests that automakers must pass for federal safety compliance should include child dummies in the back seats to learn how well the vehicles protect them from head and neck injuries.
The back seat is now empty in those crash tests.
When children are in the car, they ride in the back seat about 70 percent of the time, according to the agency's analysis of federal crash data from 1996 and 1997.
Traffic crashes are the leading cause of death for children older than age 5.
This decade, more than 60,000 children, infants to teen-agers, have died in traffic crashes.
Hall said the Safety Board is urging automakers to: --nstall shoulder belts in all rear seating positions in cars and light trucks, including the rear center seat where they are often missing.
--ake the shoulder belts in rear seats adjustable so that they can be lowered in height to properly fit across children's chests rather than rise up at their necks.
Most autos have adjustable shoulder belts only in the front seats.
--tock more vehicles with built-in child seats.
In a speech in January, Hall announced the safety board was recommending a nationwide network of fitting stations to check that child seats are properly installed to protect children in auto crashes.
Government statistics indicate more than 80 percent of child seats are installed incorrectly.
WASHINGTON (AP) --When you get your car brakes checked or an oil change at a DaimlerChrysler dealership next year, you also may be able to get expert advice on whether a child seat is being used correctly.
DaimlerChrysler AG is establishing a new service at about 20 percent of its dealerships to advise parents on how to install car seats to protect children.
DaimlerChrysler is the first automaker to accept a federal agency's challenge by creating a permanent free service using trained personnel to help customers fit child seats.
The company will spend more than $10 million annually and the service will be available at about 1,000 dealerships, company officials said today.
More than 80 percent of child seats are improperly installed in autos.
Properly used child seats cut the risk of fatal injuries in half, according to government statistics.
``Parents need help to make sure their children are properly secured in those seats,'' Robert Eaton, DaimlerChrysler co-chairman, said at a news conference.
Also involved in the initiative, which will start in several pilot cities this year and be fully in place next year, are child-seat manufacturer Fisher-Price and the nonprofit National Safety Council.
Next year, DaimlerChrysler will have the capacity to conduct 800,000 inspections annually to make sure children are buckled properly and that child seats are properly installed in both new and older DaimlerChrysler vehicles, the company officials said.
By comparison, the National Safety Council estimates about 30,000 child seats a year are being inspected now at community events.
Over the next 16 months, DaimlerChrysler will be training 2,000 certified child-seat technicians in a 32-hour course --doubling the current number in the United States.
There will be two per participating dealership.
The company's move follows a recommendation by the National Transportation Safety Board in January that a nationwide network of ``fitting stations'' for child seats be established to prevent the deaths of children in automobile accidents.
Each year, frustrated parents struggle to install about 70 models of child car seats in hundreds of types of cars with different shapes of back seats, meaning there are ``potentially 100,000 different ways to confuse the average consumer,'' NTSB Chairman Jim Hall says.
This decade, more than 60,000 children have died in traffic crashes.
When Hall recommended the fitting stations, he envisioned them across the United States at vehicle inspection sites, motor vehicle administration offices, fire stations and automobile dealerships.
Hall had said the initiative should be financed out of government transportation dollars, but he invited other groups and businesses to get involved.
Hall said at the press conference that DaimlerChrysler's effort went beyond what he suggested for the fitting stations.
``I am confident the other automobile manufacturers in our country will step forward now with their own programs,'' he said.
General Motors Corp.
also is considering some type of permanent fitting stations in its dealerships, spokesman Greg Martin said.
Since 1996, GM has worked with the National Safe Kids Campaign, a nonprofit group that promotes child safety, to hold weekend or daylong child-safety-seat checks at about 1,000 of the company's dealerships.
WASHINGTON (AP) --The government should set up a nationwide network of fitting stations for child seats to help save children's lives in car crashes, the National Transportation Safety Board recommended Wednesday.
``The NTSB believes that the federal and state governments should be more directly involved in assuring that child safety seats are used correctly,'' said Jim Hall, the chairman of the safety agency.
Most parents do not know a child seat is improperly installed until after their child is killed or injured in a crash, Hall said.
Another safety agency, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, says more than 80 percent of child car seats are used improperly.
If all children using child seats were restrained properly, 68 more lives would be saved annually, the agency estimated.
Frustrated parents struggle to properly install about 70 models of child car seats in hundreds of different types of cars each year, meaning there are ``potentially 100,000 different ways to confuse the average consumer,'' Hall said.
Properly used child seats reduce the risk of fatal injuries by more than 50 percent, he said.
The fitting stations could be established across the United States at vehicle inspection sites, motor vehicle administration offices, fire stations or automobile dealerships, Hall said.
He said the initiative should be funded out of government transportation dollars but had no cost estimate.
The board can only recommend auto safety initiatives, but its recommendations carry great weight within the federal government.
Hall also reiterated other NTSB initiatives as part of a package the board believes would reduce child deaths and injuries in traffic accidents.
Among them: --uilt-in child seats should be available in more cars and trucks.
Hall believed they should be used on airplanes and school buses as well.
``Isn't it unbelievable that regulations require everything to be secured on (airplane) takeoffs and landings --everything except our smallest children,'' Hall said.
--ll states should adopt laws that allow police to pull autos over when passengers are not wearing seat belts.
Seat belt surveys have shown when a driver is buckled, restraint use for children is 94 percent.
When a driver is unbuckled, restraint use for children is 30 percent.
--hildren 12 and under should ride in the back seat.
--hildren ages 4 to 8 should be properly secured in booster seats because they are not old enough to fit adult seat belts.
Child safety groups said permanent checkpoints would send a strong message about the importance of proper child seat installation.
``If we can do this, it will reduce the mortality of children (in car crashes) by at least 25 percent to 35 percent nationwide,'' said Martin Eichelberger, a surgeon at Children's National Medical Center and president of the National Safe Kids Campaign.
The NHTSA is set to announce early this year a federal requirement that all new child safety seats must have the same, simple anchoring system in new cars.
The average car is about 9 years old, however, underscoring the need for child seat fitting stations for the millions of vehicles already on the road, Hall said.
There used to be a joke that a Mercury is just a Ford with the bolts torqued tighter.
It was based on the perception _ correct in many cases _ that American cars were inferior to foreign models and that little differentiated one domestic from another.
Today, thanks in part to that foreign pressure, Americans shopping for domestic autos have plenty of quality from which to choose, even as many of these cars remain distinctly American in flavor.
The 2000 Mercury Sable LS is a case in point.
Redesigned this year _ lowered at nose and rear, a smooth line running up over windshield and high roof and linking the ends in a graceful arc _ the sedan is a sleeker looking car than in the past.
The Sable comes as a wagon, as well, and engine options include a pair of 3.0 liters, one turning out 153 horsepower, the other, 200 horsepower.
With the bigger engine I got just over 24 miles per gallon.
Inside, the car is big, broad American.
In the LS model tested, the leather seats are wide and firm, essentially five bucket seats.
The thigh support up front is very good, though bucket seats need better lateral support ridges than the Sable seats offer.
The dash is deep up top and angles away nicely below, affording plenty of legroom up front.
Rear legroom is ample, as well.
A new feature _ one that ought to catch on everywhere _ is height adjustment (about 3 inches) on the gas and brake pedals.
Push a button on the side of the driver's seat and the pedals come to or move away from you.
For short drivers, this means they no longer have to move the seat far forward, pushing themselves right up to the steering wheel and bluntly in the way of an exploding airbag.
Further safety enhancements include front and side airbags, seat belt pretensioners, belt use sensors, a driver's seat position sensor, and two inflation levels for the airbags, depending on the severity of a crash.
Also sure to become standard across the industry, the Sable has an interior emergency trunk release.
The instrumentation is spartan in a simple, good way.
Fuel, tachometer, speedometer, and engine temperature are in the display behind the wheel.
Window controls, door locks, and mirror controls are on the driver's door.
In the center grouping on the dash, arranged horizontally one above the other are audio controls up top, climate controls below.
Interior bins are adequate _ no large atlases, fine for standard folding maps _ and the trunk is cavernous.
A 60/40 split rear seat allows for longer parcels and items.
The LS Premium came with the DOHC, 24-valve, Duratec V6 engine.
Because of composite cam covers and intake manifold, it is 30 pounds lighter than the standard V6, yet cranks out 47 more horsepower.
Another sign of emerging quality: Tuneups come at 100,000-mile intervals.
The shift is a four-speed automatic with adaptive shift control, and in testing it ran itself up and down the gears smoothly and click-free.
Mercury, looking to lessen compartment noise, installed a lightweight instrument panel insulator, designed to absorb sound rather than just attempt to repel it.
The repel method can lead to vibrations and rattles, and the new insulation works quite well.
Engine noise was minimal, and even during rapid acceleration the engine _ muffled through a single exhaust engineered to keep the same backflow as the dual system it replaces _ was a distant burble.
Wind noise, however, was another matter, and it was so encompassing it was hard to tell if it was coming from mirrors, windows, or the sunroof.
The engine was plenty powerful _ I'm not sure I'd be happy with the lesser mill in this car _ and pulled the Sable up steep hills, and in and out of highway traffic, with confident surges.
My only performance complaint _ and I've noticed this in other Ford Motor Co.
products _ is a strange lag time, while the car is already rolling, right after you press the accelerator.
It's as if the engine is getting the message and taking a split second to decode it.
The ride?
Big American again, though stiffer laterally than in the past.
Suspension front and rear is fully independent, with gas-pressurized struts and stabilizer bars.
This makes the Sable firm on corners (and made me wish again for better lateral support up the sides of the leather seats), and agile in commuter traffic.
What I did not like was the front-to-rear, up-and-down bounce that uneven roads produced.
Looking out the windshield at times was like looking over the bow of a gently bobbing boat under headway.
Given 200 horsepower in a front-wheel-drive auto, there was remarkably little indication of torque steer.
It was evident only in quick, sharp-turn starts from a stop, a move you don't really need to make.
On wet pavement, from a stop, rapid starts did produce a bit of chatter up front.
The power-assisted, ABS brakes _ vented discs up front, drums in the rear _ brought the car to sure, swift stops, even from 50 m.p.h.
At $23,000 for this model, Mercury is getting into the territory of some very fine, lower-level luxury cars and sports sedans.
There is no reason to exclude the Sable out of hand, but anyone looking to spend that much money should certainly do some comparison shopping.
Nice touches: --he multi-folding section between the front seats.
The lower portion folds out and down, revealing storage and cup holders; the upper folds down and becomes an armrest.
--he use of the dead space ``V'' at the lower front of the front windows to house parts of the speaker system.
This is usually wasted space behind the mirror mounts.
Annoyances: --he removable carpet pads, front and rear, are thin and cheap.
At $23,000, I'd want better.
--he fold-down armrest between the front seats could be split at the middle and hinged, opening for more convenient storage space.
&UR; The numbers &LR; Base price: $21,795 &QL; Price as tested: $23,500 &QL; Horsepower 200 /Torque: 200 &QL; Wheelbase/Overall length: 108.5 &QL; Width/Height: 73.0 inches/ 57.6 &QL; Curb weight: 3,379 lbs.
&QL; Seating: 5 passengers &QL;
``Black boxes'' for cars, a technology borrowed from the airline industry, now are poised to help auto-accident investigators pin the blame on drivers responsible for causing crashes.
Since 1990, many General Motors and Ford cars and trucks have been equipped with a device similar to an airliner's black box, or flight data recorder, which automatically records the vehicle's speed, throttle setting, braking effort and engine rpm for each of the five seconds leading to an air-bag deployment.
Until now, however, it was difficult to extract that information from the car's air bag control module.
But a California company in March began selling a device that connects a car's onboard computer to a laptop computer to quickly extract such key information from a crashed vehicle.
The $2,500 device _ called a Crash Data Retrieval System _ is being marketed to police departments, insurance companies and auto-rental agencies to help them reconstruct crashes to determine fault.
``The system lets investigators collect objective, accurate data on crashes to enhance reconstruction (of accidents),'' said Jim Zaleski, president of Santa Barbara-based Vetronix Corp.
, which markets the device.
``This opens the door to a new generation of understanding and modeling automobile accidents,'' he said.
Some of the vehicles that have the capability to provide such data also can tell investigators whether the car's occupants were wearing seatbelts and whether the passenger-side air bag had been deactivated.
Most of the data that the system gives to crash investigators isn't new _ such information has been used for decades to reconstruct accidents, said Phil Haseltine, president of the Automotive Coalition for Traffic Safety, an auto-industry funded group.
But investigators had to gather the information using other sources, such as tire skid marks, in the past.
Now they can get it from the vehicle's onboard computer.
``This technology isn't measuring anything new, but it is measuring it more accurately than in the past,'' he said.
``On the engineering side, it will help the design engineer find out whether safety systems work as well in real crashes as they do in laboratory crash tests.
I predict we will see crash data recorders used by more automakers as they install more advanced air-bag systems''.
But Haseltine and others, including officials at General Motors, say there are privacy issues that have kept the technology from advancing as rapidly as it could have.
The data that a police investigator or insurance adjuster extracts from the car's air-bag control module could be translated into hard evidence for use in prosecution of a driver who is at fault in an accident, or for use by plaintiffs in lawsuits over such accidents, critics warn.
Vetronix says it is in negotiations with the California Highway Patrol to provide the devices to its officers, and the company plans to market the system aggressively to police agencies and insurance companies nationwide.
``The capability to use this information in a intrusive manner is there, and we should all be vigilant to make sure nobody tries to do that,'' Haseltine said.
``Manufacturers aren't putting these systems in vehicles with the intention that just anyone would be able to access the information.
``Giving the technology to police investigators is a gray area,'' he said.
``If a judge orders it in a court case, it can eventually wind up in court.
But it's likely that we will only see that in very serious crashes with expensive litigation.
I can't imagine using it for every little fender-bender''.
General Motors has a ``strict policy that the data belongs to whoever owns or leases the vehicle, and it won't be accessed without their consent,'' said Terry Rhadigan, the automaker's safety spokesman.
But Vetronix promotes the system as something investigators can use almost immediately, at a crash site, to download the information, and there are concerns that such a situation sometimes might preclude getting a vehicle owner's permission.
The impetus to record this information to aid crash investigators came from the National Transportation Safety Board, which recommended in 1997 that automakers develop onboard collision-sensing and -recording devices.
The NTSB has long required that such equipment be installed on most modes of public transportation, including airliners, buses and trains.
But this is the first time the technology has been extended to private passenger cars.
So-called recordable air-bag modules have been installed in many General Motors vehicles since 1990, but it has just been recently that the data from an air-bag deployment or near-deployment could be easily downloaded for use by investigators.
``There is value to this data,'' GM's Rhadigan said.
``The more we know about how our vehicles perform in the real world, the more we can improve them.
It's another way to aid in accident reconstruction, along with eyewitness reports''.
&QL; (STORY CAN END HERE.
OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS).
&QL; &QL; At present, the Vetronix system is designed to download the information only from late-model GM vehicles, and Vetronix has obtained exclusive rights from GM to market a system to retrieve the data from those cars.
Those vehicles include the 1998 Buick Park Avenue and most '98 Cadillacs; most 1999 Buicks and Cadillacs, the Chevrolet Corvette and Camaro, and the Pontiac Firebird; and nearly all 2000 model Buicks, Cadillacs, Oldsmobiles, Pontiacs, Chevrolet cars and trucks (including sport-utilities), GMC trucks and sport-utilities, the Isuzu Hombre pickup, and the Saturn S-series cars.
Other manufacturers, including the Ford Motor Co.
, have air-bag control modules that record the same information.
Vetronix says its system can be readily adapted to read the data from the other manufacturers' vehicles as soon as those automakers release the technical data necessary to develop the retrieval software.
Vetronix also plans to develop software in concert with GM to retrieve the data from air-bag-equipped GM cars dating to 1990, company officials said.
For $2,495, Vetronix provides the crash data retrieval module and Windows-based software, along with the necessary cables to connect the device to the vehicle and a laptop computer.
The software puts the data into graphs that can be printed out, showing the vehicle's speed and other data for each of the five seconds preceding the air-bag deployment.
``The potential impacts of this product are immense, since about 18,000 tow-away crashes occur daily,'' Zaleski said.
For now, the system is tied to the air-bag activation computer, and manufacturers such as GM don't see the technology evolving into a full-scale black box setup like that used in airliners, Rhadigan said.
In planes, there is a flight data recorder that keeps track of the aircraft's physical movements, and a separate cockpit voice recorder that picks up whatever the pilots say.
``We see the automobile system used in just this air-bag application,'' Rhadigan said.
``We don't ever want people to think we're going to get to the point where we record conversations and other things that occur in airplanes.
Those are pretty sophisticated devices''.
&UR; &LR; &QL; (Contact G.
Chambers Williams III by telephone at 210-250-3236 or by e-mail chambers(at)express-news.net)
KANSAS CITY, Mo.
--You undoubtedly have heard about the ``black box'' federal investigators retrieve from an airplane after an accident to help understand what caused the crash.
Soon similar devices could be widely used in automobiles and other modes of transportation, giving crash investigators insight into drivers' behavior before an accident.
Some researchers view the black box as a way to improve automobile safety.
Other experts, while supporting the concept, say it needs to be looked at more critically.
Since the mid-1970s, General Motors Corp.
has installed a sensing module along with its airbags that measured and recorded airbag performance.
Beginning with the 1999 model year, GM began installing a more sophisticated device that captures five seconds of data before impact.
Now investigators can know when the driver applied the brakes in the seconds leading up to the crash, as well as the vehicle's speed, engine speed and gas-pedal position, and whether seat belts were being used.
The use of such devices is favored by doctors, engineers and government officials.
They say real-world crashes can provide valuable information on how crashes affect the human body.
Ultimately the data could provide insights on how to build safer cars and improve treatment of crash victims.
Convinced of the recorders' benefits, James Hall, chairman of the National Transportation Safety Board, last month called for the devices on cars, trains, buses and ships.
``It is time for all modes of transportation to realize the unlimited potential that recorder technology has to offer, both in terms of economics and safety,'' he said at a board conference last month.
The board has placed the devices on its new ``most-wanted list'' of safety improvements.
The use of black-box systems raises concerns, however.
The biggest one is whether such information could be used against drivers in litigation.
``It has that potential,'' said Bob Langdon, senior partner of the Lexington, Mo.
, law firm of Langdon, Emison, Kuhlman &AMP; Evans.
As with any new technology, the courts or Congress will have to decide whether the data collected by the black boxes is admissible as evidence, he said.
As a trial lawyer, Langdon said he had concerns about who would be collecting the data, how it would be used, how accurate the devices were and how the information would be interpreted, especially if the data contradicted other physical evidence.
``Those are issues that need to be discussed in the near future,'' he said.
``It really needs to be looked at''.
GM conceded that such information might eventually be used in litigation, but the company said it also could be used against GM to prove some type of defect with a vehicle.
Despite his concerns, Langdon is quick to point out that he supports the use of such devices, because they will show how people and vehicles react in accidents.
``I see this as another tool to be used to save lives,'' he said.
The idea of a black box for automobiles is not new.
Technology that allows for its implementation is new.
An early version of the black box was part of GM's first regular-production driver-passenger airbag systems the company introduced as an option in selected 1974 production vehicles.
Since then the modules have become more sophisticated and are capable of gathering more data.
GM has installed its latest module in hundreds of thousands of GM cars from the 1999 model year.
Those cars include the Buick Century, Park Avenue and Regal; the Cadillac Eldorado, DeVille and Seville; the Chevrolet Camaro and Corvette; and the Pontiac Firebird.
GM plans to put the module in almost all of its vehicles in a few years.
``This will help us build an objective driver database,'' said Terry Connolly, director of GM's North American Safety Center.
``Currently we don't know how drivers react seconds and milliseconds before a crash''.
Connolly said this data would let auto manufacturers such as GM design better vehicles to protect passengers by understanding how drivers react to crashes.
While some people have expressed concerns that the device is an invasion of privacy, Connolly said those fears were unwarranted.
``This is a very benign set of data that is being collected,'' Connolly said.
``There is more personal information available on the Internet than what will be collected by these devices''.
Besides, he said, GM has to gain permission from the vehicle's owner before collecting the data after a crash.
Other automobile manufacturers have installed black boxes, too.
Ford Motor Co.
has installed data recorders in all of its 1999 models.
Ford's recorders collect a limited amount of data, said Jennifer Flake, a Ford safety spokeswoman.
She added that the Motor Vehicle Safety Research Advisory Council was looking into the use of recorders to determine what data would be the most helpful for researchers.
``The use of these modules is important so that we can improve our understanding of crashes and so that we have a better analysis of how injuries are coming about,'' said Jeffrey Augenstein, a professor of surgery and director of the William Lehman Injury Research Center at the University of Miami.
``With better understanding, we can better create countermeasures,'' he said.
Augenstein, a trauma surgeon, said the future of the devices was what interested him.
He said the next step would be to have the devices automatically notify emergency crews when a vehicle was involved in a crash.
``In many parts of the country, crashes occur in isolated areas, and nobody knows about it for some time,'' he said.
``With information from a (positioning system), emergency crews could know almost immediately where the car is and what occurred in the crash''.
GM offers such a system on some models under the name OnStar.
It notifies emergency crews when a car's airbag is deployed.
Also, the National Highway Traffic and Safety Administration is testing a system in Buffalo, N.Y., that automatically notifies authorities of a crash.
Eventually emergency crews, Augenstein said, would be able to look at what occurred and know what type of injuries the victims most likely would be suffering.
``It is a very, very exciting time in automobile safety,'' Augenstein said.
``There is a lot of opportunity to improve the crash experience.
It would be nice to say we know how to prevent all crashes, but there will always be crashes, that is why they call them accidents.''
WASHINGTON (AP) --The peace of mind offered by child car seats can be deceptively deadly when they are not properly used, and the government's chief transportation safety official says few are.
Jim Hall, chairman of the National Transportation Safety Board, asked states Monday to get moving on setting up ``fitting stations'' where parents go to have child restraints installed and checked.
Speaking to state highway safety officials in San Antonio, Hall offered a variety of proposals coinciding with the busy driving period of Labor Day holiday week.
Several were driven by the knowledge that car accidents are the No.
1 killer of children.
``Safety advocates know that children should be in child restraints up to the age of 4, in booster seats to the age of 8, and in the back seat,'' said Hall --speaking in a state where 2-year-olds can be legally restrained by nothing other than a seat belt.
But ``not one of the 50 states has a child restraint law with all of these requirements in it''.
Indeed, no state requires booster seats for children 4 to 8, he said.
In January, the NTSB asked all states to set up fitting stations.
So far, two are doing so, New York and South Carolina.
Three others --Hawaii, Idaho and Indiana -- are establishing sites where motorists can get trained in using the seats, according to the board.
Separately, DaimlerChrysler AG is setting up fitting stations in Minneapolis, Washington, D.C., Denver and Sacramento, Calif.
Hall also urged states to pitch the value of seat belts to black youths, who he said are half as likely as whites and Hispanics to use them.
If seat belt use were universal among young blacks, that could save 1,300 lives a year, he said.
He held out New Mexico's graduated licensing law as a fitting model as the number of young people behind the wheel increases an expected 22 percent by 2005.
The law requires a learning permit followed by an intermediate license, both restricting night driving and the number of young passengers allowed.
A full license is granted only with a clean record.
Hall praised DaimlerChrysler, but said ``states shouldn't wait for automakers to do something''.
``They need to take the lead by coordinating the establishment of permanent fitting stations'' --perhaps at repair shops, firehouses, health centers or places where cars are annually inspected for safety, he said.
So far the federal government is not weighing in with much money to help.
About $90,000 is available for fitting station demonstration grants for two or three states in the next fiscal year, said the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
JERUSALEM, September 26 (Xinhua) --Israel's Housing and Construction Ministry has issued 2,600 new tenders for house constructions in the settlements of the West Bank, Israel Radio reported Sunday.
All those tenders were issued after the new government came to power in July and 1,000 of them were slated for Ma'aleh Adumim, and others for several Jewish settlements in the West Bank, the Radio quoted ministry officials as saying.
Ma'aleh Adumim is the largest settlement situated just east of Jerusalem with about 6,000 settlers.
It is called city instead of settlement now.
Jewish settlements in the West Bank and Gaza Strip are one of the thorny issues to be solved by Israel and the Palestinians during their final-status talks which have been launched September 13.
The Palestinian side has repeatedly asked Israel to halt the settlement expansions pending a final solution to this issue.
Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat in his U.N. address on Wednesday has asked Israel again to immediately end the settlement expansions in the territories.
But Israel has declared to continue new house constructions in Ma'aleh Adumim, no matter what happens in the future.
Prime Minister Ehud Barak, during his visit to this settlement on September 15, pledged to the settlers there that he would, like the late prime minister Yitzhak Rabin, continue to expand it.
Barak said that Ma'aleh Adumim "is part of Greater Jerusalem," which has triggered sharp criticism from the Palestinian side.
Faisal Husseini, Palestinian Minister for Jerusalem Affairs, said that the only future in store for Ma'aleh Adumim is "evacuation".
"Creating a mixture of Israeli settlements with Palestinian cities is nothing but a ticking time bomb that will only lead to situations like those in Kosovo," he added.
JERUSALEM (AP) _ In a move seen by critics as a slap in the face of U.S. peacemakers, Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu is to attend a ceremony Wednesday to confer city status on the Jewish West Bank settlement of Ariel.
Netanyahu's planned visit to Ariel came as U.S.
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright was wrapping up her attempt to try to move Israeli and Palestinian leaders toward an agreement over a long-delayed Israeli pullback from part of the West Bank.
Ariel is in the middle of the West Bank, 30 kilometers (18 miles) east of Tel Aviv.
Mayor Ron Nachman told The Associated Press that there are plans to increase the population of the city from 17,000 to 30,000 by building 3,000 new housing units.
Nachman said the ceremony was set long before Albright's visit to Ariel was arranged.
Netanyahu's senior adviser, David Bar-Illan, could not immediately be reached for comment.
Nachman, an opponent of the Israeli-Palestinian autonomy accords, said the ceremony of declaring Ariel a city sends a message that Israel must strengthen its presence in the West Bank.
For more than two decades, U.S. governments have held that Israeli settlements in the West Bank are illegal and are obstacles to peace between Israel and the Palestinians.
Palestinians denounce the settlements as illegal incursions on their homeland.
Nachman said 400 new apartments will be ready for occupancy in April.
He said Ariel has permission to build 2,600 additional units, but that because of a slump in the building industry the work has not begun.
Approval for the 3,000 units was given before 1992, when Israel's previous, moderate government announced a freeze on construction in Jewish settlements in the West Bank and Gaza.
One of the first moves of Netanyahu's government in 1996 was to cancel the freeze.
Ariel was established in 1977.
Nahcman said raising the status of Ariel to city is significant as a symbol ```City' means permanence, `settlement' means temporary,'' he said.
Israel's ``Peace Now'' movement, which advocates an Israeli withdrawal from most of the West Bank in exchange for peace with the Palestinians, is planning a demonstration across from Ariel while the ceremony is in progress.
A Peace Now statement said that ``Netanyahu is spitting in Madeleine Albright's face'' by attending the ceremony.
``He is trying his best to sabotage the peace process,'' the group said.
&UR; ml-kl
JERUSALEM, November 18 (Xinhua) --The finance committee of Israel's Knesset (parliament) agreed Wednesday to allot 20 million shekels (5 million U.S. dollars) for the expansion of Jewish settlements in the West Bank.
The committee said the money was required because of the recent Israeli-Palestinian peace deal and it would be used for infrastructure work in order to expand Jewish settlements in the West Bank, Israel Radio reported.
The decision came one day after the Knesset ratified the Palestinian-Israeli peace accord with a landslide majority, paving the way for the start of Israeli redeployment in the West Bank.
The accord signed last month in Washington envisages that Israel withdraws its troops from 13.1 percent of the West Bank in return for tougher Palestinian actions against Islamic militants.
On Sunday, Israeli Foreign Minister Ariel Sharon encouraged settlers to grab as much land as they can before Israel begins its troop pullback.
Palestinian officials described Sharon's remarks as "a declaration of war," and the U.S. state department criticized the foreign minister of "undermining trust and confidence" between Israel and the Palestinians.
Without directly calling for a freeze of settlements expansion, the deal stipulates that the Israeli and Palestinian sides should refrain from taking any "unilateral step" to change the status quo of the West Bank.
But Israel holds that its policy to expand existing settlements has nothing to do with the agreement.
Meanwhile, Israeli police removed Jewish settlers occupying a remote hilltop west of the Kedumin settlement in northern West Bank.
Four settlers were detained and the mobile homes they set up were demolished.
But the settlers vowed to come back repeatedly.
The settlers began to establish mobile rooms near the hilltop Monday, a day after Sharon' remarks to encourage them to seize more land.
EL DAVID, West Bank (AP) _ Palestinian officials said Thursday that eight new mobile homes set up in a remote area of the West Bank, half a mile from the nearest community, is a new settlement and a violation of peace accords.
Israel's military government in the West Bank said the trailers stood on land belonging to the El David settlement which is located on a hilltop about 800 meters, or half a mile, from the trailer park.
Under pressure from the United States and the Palestinians to halt settlement construction, Israel has said it would not build new settlements but Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu supports expanding new settlements to accommodate what he terms ``natural growth''.
The term is loosely defined and the Jewish settler movement usually plants trailer homes on hilltops near older, existing settlements, defines them as neighborhoods, and then slowly moves in families to the new area.
Land is at the heart of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Palestinians hope to create a future state on much of the West Bank land Israel captured from Jordan in the 1967 Mideast war.
But successive Israeli government have encouraged Jewish settlement in those areas and today some 150,000 Jewish settlers live throughout the West Bank.
Khalil Tufakji, chief cartographer for Yasser Arafat's Palestinian Authority charged that the new trailers were the beginning of a separate settlement and not part of El David.
``It's a new location and new settlers will be there.
This is a violation of agreements,'' Tufakji told The Associated Press.
Peter Lerner, a spokesman for the military government, said the trailers were set up with the approval of the Israel's defense ministry and would not remain in the area permanently.
The trailers were set-up for a temporary period until a school can be renovated in the El-David settlement, Lerner said.
``Every settlement begins with a trailer.
They put up a trailer and then they start to build, I don't care what they call it,'' said Hagit Yaari, a spokeswoman for Israel's Peace Now movement, which monitors settlement construction.
Noham Ochana, a youth counselor on the site, 15 youths live in the trailers, which he said were brought in about six months ago by a movement serving troubled teen-agers.
&UR; lc-kl/dl
JERUSALEM (AP) _ Nearly 6,000 new houses and apartments are under construction in Jewish settlements in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, while close to 3,000 are standing empty, a peace group said Wednesday.
The Israeli government authorized the construction despite the United States' call for a freeze in settlement expansion.
Peace Now, an Israeli group opposed to the government's settlement policy, visited all but two of Israel's 144 settlements in the West Bank and Gaza on Wednesday and counted 5,892 units under construction.
They also found 2,888 fully built housing units standing empty.
There are currently 42,000 housing units in the West Bank and Gaza, Peace Now leader Mosi Raz said.
The new building will increase the number of units by 15 percent, he said.
Last year, Peace Now counted 5,200 houses under construction.
``These counts prove, for the umpteenth time, that this government is pro-settlements, that building is steadily increasing and that there is no thought to the consequences,'' Raz said at a news conference.
Land is central to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict because the Palestinians hope to establish an independent state in the West Bank and Gaza.
The Palestinians charge that expansion of the settlements is an attempt to pre-empt talks on a final peace settlement.
Peace Now teams visited every settlement save two.
They were prevented from entering the Itamar settlement by residents who confronted them at the gate, blocking their way in.
One settler was detained on suspicion of striking a press photographer traveling with the group.
The survey teams chose not to enter the settlement of Itzhar, where residents are still in mourning following the murder of two settlers there last week.
Israeli troops detained two Palestinians from a nearby village in connection to the killings on Tuesday.
Israel's Housing Ministry claimed that only 220 of the units under construction were government-funded.
Any other building was private, ministry advisor Moshe Eilat said.
However that statement was refuted by both Peace Now and Israel's Central Bureau of Statistics, who both said that close to two-thirds of all housing units in the West Bank and Gaza were publicly funded.
All building in the settlements, public or private, must be approved by the Defense Ministry before it can go ahead.
Statistics Bureau figures from April _ the most recent month available _ reported 3,410 units under construction, of which 2,290 were public.
The Bureau's figures are based on reports provided by the settlements themselves and on estimates based on statistical models. dh-hla
JERUSALEM (AP) _ The army has asked Jewish settlers in the West Bank and Gaza Strip to build fences around their communities, a proposal settler leaders rejected Tuesday as ineffective and an obstacle to future expansion.
The army's request came after several attacks on Jewish settlers by Palestinian militants, including the shooting deaths of two settlers outside the West Bank settlement of Itzhar last month.
The army said it sent the request to settlements that don't have a security fence yet.
Israel army radio said 21 of 144 settlements, including Maaleh Adumim and Givat Zeev near Jerusalem, were asked to build fences.
Settler leaders said fences were ineffective and would create a siege atmosphere.
``They (the army) should close off the (Palestinian) villages since the attacks come from them,'' said Yehudit Tayar, spokeswoman of the Jewish Settlers Council.
Benny Kashriel, mayor of Maaleh Adumim, said he would not meet the army's request because it would send the wrong message to residents.
``In Tel Aviv and Jerusalem there were also attacks but does that mean we should fence in the city centers,'' he said.
Settlers also oppose such boundaries since they might be an obstacle to future expansion.
The Peace Now group, which advocates the creation of a Palestinian state in the West Bank and Gaza, said the settlers' refusal to build fences showed that their opposition to a land-for-peace deal with the Palestinians was not based on security concerns, as they claim.
``Peace Now calls on the government to evacuate each settlement that refuses to be enclosed by a fence,'' Peace Now said.
&UR; lc-kl
JERUSALEM, April 12 (Xinhua) --In defiance of fresh U.S. criticism over increasing Jewish settlement activities in the West Bank, Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu Monday pledged to further expand settlement construction.
"We have done a lot, and we will do a lot more," Netanyahu said while touring an industrial park under construction on empty land between two Jewish settlements in the West Bank, according to local television reports.
He symbolically signed a contract worth 1.7 million U.S. dollars for the first structure at the park, situated between the Jewish settlements of Psagot and Adam in central West Bank and planned for high-tech industry.
Netanyahu's tour came only one day after a senior U.S. envoy publicly slammed Israel's intensified settlement activities in the West Bank in recent months.
Speaking to reporters after meeting with Netanyahu, visiting U.S.
Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern Affairs Martin Indyk Sunday reiterated that Washington is "concerned" about the ongoing expansion of settlements.
"We work very hard to ensure that unilateral actions on the Palestinian side are not taken...and we also have a responsibility to ensure that other actions aren't taken that can affect and prejudge the negotiations," he said.
Last week in Washington, U.S.
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright told visiting Israeli Foreign Minister Ariel Sharon that the settlement activities violate agreements signed by Israel and the Palestinians, which ban any unilateral actions by both sides.
Netanyahu said Israel has never agreed to limit the expansion of existing Jewish settlements.
Since the hard-line prime minister came to power in 1996, millions of shekels have been funnelled to the construction of new Jewish settlements or expansion of existing ones, and the Jewish population of the West Bank has grown by 30 percent.
Ehud Barak, his main rival in the May elections for prime ministership, accuses Netanyahu of giving in to Jewish settlers to ensure their support for his power.
During his visit to the industrial park, Netanyahu asked some 100 settlement leaders to work for his re-election.
In a related development in the West Bank, settlers moved four tents onto a hill near the Jewish settlement of Kiryat Arba outside Hebron Monday.
The settlers claimed the hilltop was within Kiryat Arba's perimeter, but Israeli soldiers declared it a closed military area and ordered them to leave.
JERUSALEM, June 11 (Xinhua) --Israeli Army ordered Thursday to set up a force of civilian guards to protect Jewish settlements in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, an army statement announced.
Under an order signed by Uzi Dayan, commander of Israeli Army's Central Command, the civilian guards will be operational within the next few weeks, first at some large settlements such as Ma'ale Adumin, Ariel and Givat Ze'ev, the statement said.
Ma'ale Adumin is situated by the road linking Jerusalem and the West Bank city Jericho, Ariel located between Ramallah and Nablus, and Givat Ze'ev between Ramallah and Jerusalem.
They are the three largest settlements in the West Bank.
Although the army did not give the reasons for setting up such forces, it is believed that this step is aimed at strengthening the settlements and allay security concerns by the settlers.
Since its occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip in the 1967 Mideast War, Israel has created over 190 Jewish settlements in the Palestinian territories, of which 173 are scattered across the West Bank.
The total population of Jewish settlers stands at around 150,000 and this figure does not include those settlers living in the Arab East Jerusalem, which has also been occupied by Israel since 1967.
Jewish settlements is one of the outstanding obstacles that block the progress in the Israeli-Palestinian peace process, that has been halted since Israeli construction of the Har Homa settlement in East Jerusalem in early 1997.
Israeli government's move to create the civilian guards forces also came amid reports that Israel and the Palestinian National Authority are close to reaching an agreement on Israeli troop redeployment in the West Bank.
If Israel accepts the U.S. proposal for a 13 percent pullback, about 18 Jewish settlements in the West Bank are likely to be turned into isolated islands surrounded by Palestinian-controlled areas.
Citing their security concerns, the settlers have been lobbying rightwing members of the government to disrupt any agreement on further redeployment.
JERUSALEM, May 13 (Xinhua) --Israeli Foreign Ministry protested on Wednesday against the European Union's decision to boycott settlement products from Israel by imposing heavy customs duties.
In a statement, the Foreign Ministry said that the EU decision is "unfair" and would be "harmful" to reviving the Middle East peace process.
The EU on Wednesday decided to ask all its 15 members not to exempt customs duties for products made by Israeli settlements in the occupied territories.
These include agricultural products, processed foods, wines, flowers and others.
The statement accused that the EU's decision violated the trade agreements signed with Israel, which give partial or complete exemption from customs duties to Israeli products of these categories.
The EU said that the occupied territories are not part of Israel, and therefore the settlement products would be subjected to heavy customs duties.
In April, EU threatened to imposed customs duties on products from Israeli settlements.
Israel was making diplomatic efforts to block the EU move, which it regarded as a grave threat politically rather than economically.
There are about 190 Israeli settlements in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
In Gaza alone the number is 19.
The settlements which encroach on ever-more Palestinian lands, are armed enclave constantly guarded by Israeli soldiers who often outnumbered the settlers themselves.
JERUSALEM, September 26 (Xinhua) --The new housing construction tenders for settlement expansion in the Israeli-occupied Arab territories would seriously jeopardize the peace process with the Palestinians and Syrians, said an Israeli peace group here Sunday.
After learning that Israeli Housing and Construction Ministry has issued tenders for building 2,600 new houses for Jewish settlers in West Bank settlements, the Peace Now group said this action will cause more trouble for the Israeli-Palestinian final-status talks The number of new tenders issued by the ministry exceeds the total number issued in the three years' tenure of the previous government led by Benjamin Netanyahu, the satement added.
The group is scheduled to ask Prime Minister Ehud Barak to explain the government's policy toward the settlement expansion, the statement said.
Meanwhile, Education Minister Yossi Sarid expressed his objection to settlement expansion in the West Bank, including the new tenders.
Housing and Construction Minister Yitzhak Levy, from the National Religious Party, said Sunday the tenders were issued under the government's guidelines.
Israel Radio reported earlier that all those 2,600 tenders were issued after the new government came to power in July and 1,000 of them were slated for Ma'aleh Adumim, the largest settlement east of Jerusalem with about 6,000 settlers.
Israel calls Ma'aleh Adumim a city, instead of settlement.
The other tenders were for several Jewish settlements in the West Bank.
Jewish settlements in the West Bank and Gaza Strip is one of the thorny issues to be solved by Israel and the Palestines during their final-status talks which has been launched on September 13.
The Palestinian side has repeatedly asked Israel to halt the settlement expansions pending a final solution to this issue.
Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat in a speech in the United Nations on Wednesday asked Israel again to immediately end the settlement expansions in the territories.
But Israel has declared to continue new house constructions in Ma'aleh Adumim, not matter what happens in the future.
Prime Minister Ehud Barak, during his visit to this settlement on September 15, pledged to the settlers there that he will continue to expand it.
Barak said that Ma'aleh Adumim "is part of Greater Jerusalem".
The Palestinian side strongly criticized Barak for making such remarks.
Faisal Husseini, Palestinian Cabinet Minister in charge of Jerusalem Affairs, said "the only future in store for Ma'aleh Adumim is evacuation".
"Creating a mixture of Israeli settlements with Palestinian cities is nothing but a ticking time bomb that will only lead to situations like those in Kosovo," he added.
CAIRO, November 29 (Xinhua) --The Palestinian Authority (PA) has accused the Israeli settlement policy of aiming to prevent the establishment of an independent Palestinian state and isolating Jerusalem from the West Bank through building new Jewish settlements.
The PA made the accusation in a memorandum to be presented to an emergency session of the Cairo-based Arab League due to start Sunday.
The extraordinary meeting of the league's 22 permanent members, called at the request of Syria and the PA, will discuss new Israeli settlements in the West Bank and the Golan Heights.
The settlement issue has underlined the trend of the policy adopted by the Israeli government led by Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu, said the document.
Palestinians, infuriated by Netanyahu's pledge of more Jewish settlements, complain that the Jewish settlements have broken up the territories between their main cities and diminished their chances of establishing an independent state in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
The memorandum reviewed the Israeli policy regarding Jerusalem, settlements, confiscation of Palestinian lands, and pushing Jewish immigrants in Jerusalem to the holy city of Judaize.
It also noted the fact that Israel has earmarked a huge budget for the settlement policy, while leaving Jerusalem suffering from deterioration in all utilities and services.
It shows that Israel has adopted an extremist policy against the Palestinians and the Syrians in the occupied lands, the memorandum concluded.
CAIRO, June 14 (Xinhua) --Delegates to a U.N. conference on Monday urged Israel to halt construction of Jewish settlements in Palestinian areas and adhere to the peace agreements signed between the two sides.
Speakers at the opening session of the two-day fourth meeting of the U.N.
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People criticized Israel's settlement policies.
"Building of new settlements and expansion of the existing ones have destructive effects on the Mideast peace process," said Seyyid al-Masri, Egypt's assistant foreign minister.
The international community was surprised over Israel's construction work at the Abu Ghneim Mountain and Ras al-Amoud settlements and the expansion of the Maali Adumim settlement, al-Masri said.
Israel's activities have aroused fears over the devastating consequences of its settlement policy on the peace process, he added, calling on Israel to halt the settlement activities.
Israel, which always has ignored such discussions, did not send a delegate to the meeting.
U.N. officials and delegates from member countries also started preparations for a meeting in Geneva next month that could start a process for dealing with Jewish settlements under international laws.
That meeting, called by the U.N.
General Assembly, is to urge Switzerland to enforce a ban on settlement activities in the Israeli-occupied territories as a violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention.
The Palestinians maintain that construction of Jewish settlements in Arab East Jerusalem, the West Bank and Gaza Strip violates the convention, which calls for protection for civilians in wars.
The convention bans usurpation of land by an occupying power.
In a letter to the meeting, U.N.
Secretary General Kofi Annan called on the Palestinians and Israel to focus on building peace.
"I appeal for the political courage of the leaders on both sides and call upon them to re-embark on the negotiations process in the spirit of pragmatism and statesmanship," Annan said in the letter read on his behalf by his deputy, Chinmaya Gharekhan.
Israel and the Palestinians have failed to hold substantive peace talks largely due to Israel's settlement activities since hardline Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu came to power in 1996.
JERUSALEM, April 11 (Xinhua) - A senior U.S. official Sunday expressed Washington's deep concern over the ongoing Israeli settlement activity in the West Bank, saying it will hamper the peace making between Israel and the Palestinians.
Speaking to reporters after meeting with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, U.S.
Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern Affairs Martin Indyk urged Israel to stop these activities which "can affect and prejudge the negotiations".
Indyk arrived in Israel earlier Sunday for talks to enhance the U.S.-Israel Memorandum of Understanding on Strategic Cooperation, which was signed in October last year and designed to improve Israel's defense and deterrence capabilities.
He said the U.S. and its principal ally in the Middle East should remain coordinated in face of threats of ballistic missiles and non-conventional weapons in the region.
But he said the strategic cooperation also has another aspect, that is, to look for ways to move forward the stalled peace process.
"The window of peacemaking is closed," he said, citing the frozen agreement between Israel and the Palestinians and the stalemate on the Israeli-Syrian track.
He said "some questions have occurred" concerning the U.S.-Israel strategic cooperation, referring to the Jewish settlement activities in the West Bank, "particularly in central West Bank".
For the last two months, Washington has expressed its concern on several occasions over Israel's land grabbing and settlement expansion in the West Bank, saying it is a reversal of Israeli assurance that such activity would not be carried out.
According to Israeli-Palestinian peace accords, both sides should not take unilateral actions which will change the status quo in Gaza and the West Bank before the talks on final status end.
Washington said unilateral actions include Jewish settlement activity on the Israeli side and a unilateral declaration of statehood by the Palestinians.
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright raised the settlement issue during talks with Israeli Foreign Minister Ariel Sharon in Washington last Friday.
Earlier this year, U.S.
Middle East envoy Dennis Ross bluntly dismissed the settlement activity as "destructive" to the peace process.
Reacting to Indyk's remarks, Netanyahu repeated the government's line that Israel has pledged not to build new settlements but never promised to stop the expansion of existing settlements.
Washington has, however, said that the accelerated Jewish settlement activity in the recent months included construction of new settlements as well as an expansion of settlements well beyond their existing perimeters, in many cases involving expansions to distant hilltops.
JERUSALEM (AP) _ In a move seen by critics as a slap in the face of U.S. peacemakers, Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu is to attend a ceremony Wednesday to confer city status on the Jewish West Bank settlement of Ariel.
Netanyahu's planned visit to Ariel came as U.S.
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright was wrapping up an attempt to try to move Israeli and Palestinian leaders toward agreement over a long-delayed Israeli pullback from part of the West Bank.
Ariel is in the middle of the West Bank, 30 kilometers (18 miles) east of Tel Aviv.
Mayor Ron Nachman told The Associated Press that there are plans to increase the population of the city from 17,000 to 30,000 by building 3,000 new housing units.
Nachman said the ceremony was set long before Albright's visit to Ariel was arranged.
Netanyahu's senior adviser, David Bar-Illan, could not immediately be reached for comment.
Nachman, an opponent of the Israeli-Palestinian autonomy accords, said the ceremony of declaring Ariel a city sends a message that Israel must strengthen its presence in the West Bank.
Ariel was established in 1977.
Nachman said raising the status of Ariel to city is significant as a symbol ```City' means permanence, `settlement' means temporary,'' he said.
For more than two decades, U.S. governments have held that Israeli settlements in the West Bank are illegal and are obstacles to peace between Israel and the Palestinians.
Palestinians denounce the settlements as illegal incursions on their homeland.
Israel's ``Peace Now'' movement, which advocates an Israeli withdrawal from most of the West Bank in exchange for peace with the Palestinians, is planning a demonstration across from Ariel while the ceremony is in progress.
A Peace Now statement said that ``Netanyahu is spitting in Madeleine Albright's face'' by attending the ceremony.
``He is trying his best to sabotage the peace process,'' the group said.
JERUSALEM (AP) _ In a show of solidarity with the Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, Israel's Arab community on Friday announced a boycott of 120 goods made in Jewish settlements.
The Palestinians hope to establish a future state in the West Bank and Gaza, and fear independence will be increasingly difficult to attain with the expansion of the Jewish settlements.
Israel's nearly 1 million Arabs often have split identities.
While citizens of Israel, many also support the aspirations of their brethren in the West Bank and Gaza.
The decision to boycott settlement products was made by a group of Israeli Arab leaders, including legislators and mayors, on Thursday.
Starting Monday, a list with 120 products to be boycotted, including ice cream, canned foods and sweets, will be posted in Arab-owned shops and published in Arabic-language media, Ahmed Saad, a member of Israel's parliament, said Friday.
``We expect that the citizens will fully comply with the boycott because they are politically aware of our goal,'' Saad said.
Jewish settler leaders said they might retaliate by not employing Arabs in the settlements.
About 17,000 Palestinians from West Bank and Gaza as well as thousands of Israeli Arabs work in the settlements, the Jerusalem Post daily said.
&UR; sa-kl
JERUSALEM, August 2 (Xinhua) --The Israeli government today authorized simpler procedure for granting permission for Jewish constructions in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, in a bid to ease the settlement building freeze imposed by the previous government.
The decision was made during today's weekly cabinet session, following a series of meetings between Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and leaders of the settlements last month.
Netanyahu reportedly accused, at the cabinet meeting, the previous government of handicapping the natural developments of Jewish settlements, while failing to impose same restrictions on Palestinian buildings.
He noted that the building of a kindergarten in the Jewish settlements used to be approved by a special ministerial committee in the last four years, calling it "discrimination" of Jewish settlers.
The Israeli premier declared that it will no longer continue like that, and from now on, only he himself and Defense Minister Yitzhak Mordehai would give the greenlight.
However, he stressed that any proposal to build new settlements would still require a special full cabinet approval.
Israeli media pointed out that the message appeared to be that the freeze of settlement activity is over, although no operative decision was made at today's cabinet meeting.
In reaction to the cabinet decision regarding to the settlements, the Council of Jewish Settlements in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip warmly welcomed the decision.
However, the council also expressed its disappointment that there has been no decision on actual developments and buildings of the Jewish settlements.
Also today, Knesset (Israel's parliament) member of Meretz, Yossi Sarid said he had information on government plans for an unprecedented settlement campaign.
Sarid, environment minister in the previous Labor-led government, charged that the settlement activity was the biggest enemy of the peace process.
Former Finance Minister Avraham Shohat also added his voice to the criticism, warning the government's decision would lead to large scale of investments in the settlements, and would lead to reductions in American loan guarantee.
JERUSALEM, February 15 (Xinhua) --Palestinian National Authority (PNA) President Yasser Arafat today urged Israel to cease settlement construction and refrain from actions against Arab residents in East Jerusalem.
Speaking on a tour to the West Bank city of Jenin, Arafat said that Israel should abide by the interim agreement it has signed and not attempt to alter it.
He criticized Israel's moves of continuing the building of settlements in the territories including East Jerusalem, and canceling state of permanent residents for Arabs living in East Jerusalem.
The Palestinian leader said that "the Palestinians were stronger than the settlements and stronger than the settlers".
He added the PNA leadership had decided to conduct dialog with the opposition of the Israeli government in its struggle against the expansion of settlements.
Arafat's call came a day ahead of the resumption of the Israeli-Palestinian talks on further implementing the interim agreement.
The talks signaled the continuation of the peace process following Israeli troop redeployment in the West Bank city of Hebron last month.
The resumption of the talks was agreed in the summit held last Sunday between Arafat and Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu.
Eight joint panels will start negotiations Sunday to discuss economic and security issues related to the interim agreement, including the opening of safe passages between the West Bank and Gaza Strip, the construction of an airport and sea port in Gaza, and the development of economic and security cooperation.
The Israeli negotiating team will be headed by Foreign Minister David Levy and the Palestinian one by Arafat's deputy Mahmoud Abbas (or Abu Mazen).
A day earlier, Arafat convened a joint meeting of the Palestinian Council and PLO Executive Committee in the West Bank city of Jericho.
The meeting condemned Israel for failing to respond to the messages issued by the council on the settlement issue, and called on Palestinians to continue fighting against the settlements.
The Palestinian leadership also adopted a resolution to grant health, housing and financial assistance to the 30 Palestinian women detainees released by Israel earlier this week.
GAZA, October 12 (Xinhua) --A senior Palestinian official Tuesday repeated objection to the continued expansion of Jewish settlements, saying it could prevent the beginning of the final status negotiations and destroy the peace process.
"Settlements will have a negative affect on the position of Palestinian negotiators, it will destroy the peace process," said Nabil Abourudeneh, advisor to Palestinian National Authority (PNA) Chairman Yasser Arafat.
Abourudeneh made the remarks in the West Bank city of Ramallah after a meeting between Arafat and visiting Italian President Carlo Azeglio Ciampi, during which the two leaders discussed the latest development in the peace process.
The Palestinians, who regards Jewish settlements as violation of signed agreements, have been angered by the Israeli cabinet's approval of the construction of 2,600 new housing units in four West Bank settlements this week.
Arafat has condemned the decision on several occasions.
PNA Information Minister Yasser Abed Rabbo went further by calling it "crazy decisions".
Israel denied it was expanding settlements, saying all the new housing units are within the borders of existing settlements.
Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak, who took office in July with a pledge to revive the stalled peace process, said that he will neither build new Jewish settlements nor dismantle existing ones.
In a move apparently aimed to appease the Palestinians, an Israeli ministerial committee reviewing the settlement policy of the former right-wing government met Sunday for the first time and identified seven settlements as illegal.
The seven outposts were among the 42 settlements established in the three years of the former Israeli government.
The accelerated settlement activity in the last three years was seen as an attempt by the settlers to grab as much as land before Israel and the Palestinians entered the final status talks, in which the thorniest issues including the fate of settlements will be dealt with.
Israel and the Palestinians held a ceremony on September 13, kicking off the long-overdue talks, but the Israeli side has yet to name its negotiators.
JERUSALEM, October 14 (Xinhua) --Israel will begin from next week to dismantle 12 Jewish encampments in the West Bank under an agreement reached between the government and settler leaders, the Prime Minister's Office said Thursday.
Danny Yatom, political and security advisor to Prime Minister Ehud Barak, met settler leaders here Wednesday night.
The two sides agreed to remove 12 hilltop outposts instead of 15 as decided earlier by Barak.
Of the 12 outposts, one will remain as pasture land and another as a preparatory school through the end of the school year and their future will then be discussed.
The settler leaders, who had opposed Barak's decision, said they were satisfied with the results and promised that they would help facilitate the evacuations.
Commenting on this issue, President Ezer Weizman said that the dismantlement of the illegal encampments is necessary and the result could help push the peace process forward.
After the first meeting Sunday of a ministerial committee reviewing the policy on Jewish settlements under former right-wing government, Barak informed Jewish settler leaders Tuesday that he plans to dismantle 15 encampments illegally built in the West Bank.
Barak said his decision was based on the recommendations from the defense establishment, which found that settlers have established 42 encampments throughout the West Bank since the signing of the Wye River peace accord last fall and their legalities were all in question.
"I consider settlement activities in the West Bank, which was always conducted at the behest and with the authorization of the government, very important.
But I think the law is of utmost importance," Barak told the leaders.
The Palestinians regard Jewish settlements in the West Bank and Gaza Strip as illegal and demand that Israel evacuate all 144 settlements in these areas.
They were angry with Barak for approving the construction of 2,600 new housing units this week in four settlements near Jerusalem, saying the settlement expansion could prevent the start of the final status talks and destroy the peace process.
Israel denied it was expanding Jewish settlements, saying that the new housing units are all within the borders of existing settlements.
One month after a ceremonial start, Israel has yet to name its negotiators in the final status talks, in which the fate of the Jewish settlements will be dealt with.
The Palestinians accused Israel of foot-dragging.
WASHINGTON, April 4 (Xinhua) --The Clinton administration today expressed concerns over a new Israeli plan to expand the existing Jewish settlement on the West Bank and near Jerusalem, indicating such a move will further erode confidence between the Israelis and Palestinians.
During a photo session with Norway's Foreign Minister Bjoern Tore Godfal, Secretary of State Madeleine Albright told reporters that she raised the issue during a meeting Thursday with Israeli Defense Minister Yitzhak Mordechai.
"It's a very delicate moment in the whole situation, where it's very important to do everything we can to rebuild the bonds of confidence.
Within that context, I expressed my concern to Minister Mordechai about the thickening of the settlement," she said.
Mordechai announced this week that there is a plan to add 358 housing units to the West Bank settlements of Jenin and Sharei Tikva and several thousand near Jerusalem.
And he told a Jewish group in Washington today that the existing settlements "must be able to develop and grow".
The Clinton administration has opposed construction of new settlements as complicating to territorial negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians, but said expansion of existing ones wasn't a problem as long as it was a product of "natural growth".
But this time, the Clinton administration expressed "concerns" as it is at a sensitive time.
JERUSALEM (AP) _ Coinciding with the start of a Mideast summit, Israel radio reported Thursday that bulldozers are leveling ground for the 12-fold expansion of a Jewish settlement in the West Bank.
The Israeli group Peace Now said the construction site is more than 1 kilometer (mile) away from the Alei Zahav settlement.
The building constitutes the start of a new settlement, not the expansion of an existing one, the group said.
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has promised the United States and the Palestinians that he will not start new settlements in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, but only expand existing ones to accommodate natural population growth.
The Palestinians say settlement construction is part of an illegal land grab by Israel and undercuts their claims to statehood in the West Bank and Gaza.
Israel radio said the Defense Ministry has approved the construction of 1,200 homes near Alei Zahav, which is located about 5 kilometers from the invisible line between Israel and the West Bank.
Peace Now said Alei Zahav has about 100 homes now.
Project manager Arieh Ofri told the radio that in the first stage, 100 homes would be built and future construction would depend on demand.
``This is a very desirable area,'' Ofri said, noting the proximity of the settlement to Israel and the Tel Aviv metropolitan area.
``So far, everything that has been built has been sold''.
Peace Now leader Mossi Raz said that calling the project an expansion of Alei Zahav was a ruse.
He said that while the construction was taking place within the municipal boundaries of Alei Zahav, in fact a new, separate community was being built.
``Legally, it's not a new settlement, but for all intents and purposes, it is, to any rational person,'' Raz said.
&UR; kl
AMMAN, December 14 (Xinhua) --Serious differences arose between Jordan and Israel over a planned expansion of Jewish settlement in the West Bank, Jordanian Information Minister Marwan Muasher has said.
"I've clarified the Jordanian position regarding the settlements and stressed that this constitutes a threat to the peace process," said Muasher Friday when concluding a four-day visit to Israel.
"There are big differences between the Jordanian and Israeli perspectives on the issue of settlements," Muasher said after his meeting with Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Natanyahu in West Jerusalem, according to Jordan radio.
Muasher's remarks coincided with an Israeli government decision Friday to give tax breaks and generous grants to Jewish settlements in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, a move that could entice more Israelis to settle in the occupied area.
The decision would likely boost construction and investment in the 144 Jewish settlements.
The Palestinians sharply opposed the settlement expansion and warned that it would lead to the collapse of the peace efforts.
Muasher told Israel TV Thursday that Jordan was committed to working with Israel "to protect the achievements" of peace, but warned that Netanyahu's policies were endangering them.
Muasher, who was Jordan's first ambassador to Israel following the kingdom's 1994 peace treaty with the Jewish state, cited the settlement expansion plans and the delays in implementing the Israeli-Palestinian accords in particular.
He said Friday that the construction of new settlements in Ras Al Amud area in Jerusalem and the Israeli cabinet decision to provide additional facilities to the settlement activity posed a threat to the Arab-Israeli peace process.
Muasher said that during his meetings with Israeli officials, he stressed Jordan's keen interest and desire to work with all peace-loving forces to push the peace process forward, and to block all attempts to abort the peace process.
A statement issued by Netanyahu's office said the prime minister assured Muasher that Israel was still committed to the Middle East peace process.
"The Israeli government remains committed in the peace process with the Palestinians and respects the peace treaty signed with Jordan," the statement said.
"Israel is conscious of Jordan's needs for stability and prosperity," Netanyahu told Muasher, according to the statement.
GAZA, December 7 (Xinhua) --Israel confiscated 17,000 donums (1,596.3 hectares) of Palestinian land in 1998 to expand Jewish settlements in the West Bank and Gaza Strip and 154 Palestinians were killed in conflicts triggered by the expansion activities, said an official report.
The Jewish settlement activities also led to the destruction of 20,000 trees and 157 Palestinian houses, the withdrawal of the identity cards of 420 Palestinian citizens living in Jerusalem, said an annual report issued on Tuesday by the Palestinian National Committee on Settlement Combat.
Jewish settlements in the West Bank and Gaza reached 200, with settlers to be 170,000 by the end of the year 2000.
The Israeli authorities issued tenders for building 3,000 housing units early last July, the report said.
On Monday, the ongoing settlement activities led to the suspension of the Palestinian-Israeli final-status talks that deal with thorny issues including the future of the Israeli settlements.
JERUSALEM, August 13 (Xinhua) --Disputing the government's defense of its expansion of Jewish settlements, the Israeli peace group Peace Now revealed in a survey Thursday that a large number of housing units in settlements are vacant.
The Peace Now survey showed that at least 2,880 housing units in the Jewish settlements in the Palestinian territories of West Bank and Gaza Strip are vacant.
Peace Now, the leading Israeli peace organization supporting the Middle East peace process, also revealed that there are still 5,892 new housing units now under construction in various settlements in the West Bank and Gaza Strip because of the Likud-led government's policy of encouraging the settlement expansion.
The survey said the population growth rate at the Jewish settlements is only 3.2 percent, while the housing construction is increasing at a rate of 15 percent despite the oversupply of housing.
These results refuted the Likud government's claim that the construction of new housing units in settlements is necessitated by rising housing demand caused by the natural growth of the population of settlers.
Last year, the U.S. government issued a similar report on the housing situation in the settlements which also showed that a large number of units were vacant.
Israeli government strongly denied the report, saying that the settlements faced a housing shortage due to the growth of their population.
The Peace Now survey was conducted by 20 teams that it sent to settlements in the West Bank and Gaza Strip to inspect the housing situation there.
Photographer Yoav Leff of Israel's newspaper Ha'aretz, hired by the Peace Now to document the activities of the Peace Now, was attacked and slightly injured Wednesday by a group of settlers in the Itamar settlement near the West Bank city Nablus.
Israel has built 190 Jewish settlements in the West Bank and Gaza Strip since it captured them from Jordan and Egypt in the 1967 Middle East War.
Settlement expansion is one of the most sensitive disputes in the Israeli-Palestinian peace talks, which have been stalled since March 1997 when Israel broke ground for the Har Homa settlement in the disputed Arab East Jerusalem.
The previous Labor government in Israel froze the settlement expansion in order to conduct peace talks with the Palestinians, but the right-wing Likud government immediately revoked the ban after it came to power in mid-1996.
JERUSALEM, August 13 (Xinhua) --Activists from Israel's Peace Now movement scuffled with Jewish settlers Friday when they toured a hilltop near a West Bank settlement to monitor what they called illegal settlement expansions.
The activists and settlers pushed and sometimes threw punches at each other on the hilltop about three miles from the settlement of Itamar in central West Bank, Israel Radio reported.
The visitors called the outposts set up by the settlers illegal, but a spokesman for the settlers said the camps were within the range of Itamar and called the tour of the activists provocative.
The tour was cut short at a nearby settlement of Berakha, where Israeli soldiers barred the activists from entering, declaring it a closed military zone.
Right-wing legislator Uzi Landau from the Likud party called on Prime Minister Ehud Barak to ban similar "provocative visits" by members of Peace Now, a watchdog monitoring settlement activities in the West Bank and Gaza.
Since taking office early last month, Barak has pledged to move forward the peace process stalled under the three years of rule by his hard-line predecessor Benjamin Netanyahu.
But he has been at odds with the Palestinians over Jewish settlements.
The Palestinians have urged Barak to dismantle all the settlements, calling them illegal and inconsistent with peace accords signed by the two sides.
Barak has promised to halt building of new settlements, but vowed not to remove existing ones before Israel and the Palestinians enter the final-status talks.
The ex-army chief has said that large blocs of Jewish settlements would remain under Israeli control after a permanent peace accord was reached as a result of the final-status talks.
Earlier this week, Peace Now said that Jewish settlements are expanding under Barak's government at a faster pace than under the Netanyahu government.
The group said in the month since Barak took office, the Housing Ministry has issued tenders for the construction of 1,517 apartments in the settlements, six times the average monthly rate of house construction in the settlements under the former government.
The Housing Ministry said the figures were incorrect and tenders had been issued for only 678 new homes.
Nearly 200,000 Jewish settlers live in more than 150 settlements which scattered in the West Bank and Gaza, dividing the areas into many isolated parts.
ATTENTION EDITORS: The following photos are part of tonight's New York Times Photo Package, moving 10/28/98.
Photo clients will automatically receive these photos via AP's PhotoExpress or may download them from either the Wieck Photo Database in Dallas at 972-392-0888 or from NYTPhotos on Newscom at 305-448-8411.
Non-clients can make individual purchases by calling (888) 603-1036 or 212-556-4204.
(NYT35) GUADALAJARA, Mexico --Oct.
28, 1998 --GUADALAJARA-ARCHITECTURE, 10-28 -- Jorge Vergara Madrigal, the founder of the Omnilife Group, a vitamin-drink company, is planning a giant cultural center in Guadalajara and is drawing star architects from around the world.
The future of architectural pilgrimage may be coming to city of more than 2 million people.
(Image Consulting Group/New York Times Photo) (NYT34) WASHINGTON --Oct.
28, 1998 --NBA-LABOR-2, 10-28 -- A group of disgruntled fans protesting outside of the midtown hotel where the NBA players and owners are meeting.
The handful of people, wearing black caps and black-and-white shirts, held sarcastic protest signs and lobbied beside cardboard boxes designed for contributions.
(Frances Roberts/New York Times Photo) (NYT33) NEW YORK --Oct.
28, 1998 --NBA-LABOR-1, 10-28 -- Michael Jordan of the Chicago Bulls in New York on Wednesday for labor talks.
The meetings have not been billed as emergency sessions, but with the NBA scheduled to announce the cancellation of more games, negotiations between owners and players may go a long way toward settling the nearly fourth-month-old labor impasse and salvaging the season.
(Frances Roberts/New York Times Photo) (NYT32) WASHINGTON --Oct.
28, 1998 --CLINTON, 10-28 -- President Clinton making a robust defense of his public record on Wednesday at a joint news conference in the Rose Garden with President Andres Pastrana of Colombia, in Washington on a state visit.
Clinton says he has redeemed his promises to the American people, claiming that Republicans have knuckled under to well-financed special interests.
(Stephen Crowley/New York Times Photo) (NYT31) ATLANTA --Oct.
28, 1998 --SUB-GLF-ATLANTA-YOUTH-2, 10-28 -- A section of the East Lake Meadows housing project that is scheduled for demolition.
The buildings are being replaced by single-family homes, duplexes and apartments.
(Jim Middleton/New York Times Photo) (NYT30) ATLANTA --Oct.
28, 1998 --GLF-ATLANTA-YOUTH-1, 10-28 -- Gabrielle Peck, a third grader at East Lake Elementary School and a member of the community's golf academy, practicing bunker shots at the Yates public course.
$93.5 million has been raised to revive the golf course and the community - through new housing, an after-school academic program, a community center, a golf academy and a caddie scholarship program that has sent some local youths on to college.
(Jim Middleton/New York Times Photo) (NYT29) MARIETTA, Ga.
--Oct.
28, 1998 --CLINTON-BARR, 10-28 -- Rep.
Bob Barr, R-Ga.
, blows out the candles on his 50th birthday cake during a party in Marietta on Tuesday.
Barr, who faces the world with a steady glare that Clintonites rate as villainous, began targetting the president well before the Lewinsky sex scandal broke.
(Alan S.
Weiner/New York Times Photo) (NYT28) CAPE CANAVERAL, Fla.
--Oct.
28, 1998 --SCI-SHUTTLE, 10-28 -- The expected turnout of 3,700 media people covering the launch of the space shuttle Discovery (whose crew includes 77-year-old John Glenn) is thought to be the largest since the Apollo lunar flights.
Photographers set up remote cameras around the shuttle pad that will be set off by the explosive sound of lift-off, which is scheduled for 2 p.m.
Thursday. (Keith Meyers/New York Times Photo) (NYT27) UNDATED --Oct.
28, 1998 --REPUBS-CLINTON, 10-28 -- Democrats on Wednesday gleefully seized on what they considered the Republicans' miscalculation in waging a last-minute $10 million advertising campaign exploiting President Clinton's sex scandal, calling it a desperation tactic.
In the ad, Clinton denies the Lewinsky affair, top; two women discuss the scandal; the Republicans make their pitch, below.
(New York Times Photo) (NYT26) SAFRANBOLU, Turkey --Oct.
28, 1998 --TURKEY-ANNIVERSARY-2, 10-28 -- A Kurdish woman stands in front of her home in the town of Safranbolu on Tuesday.
Turks will be celebrating the 75th anniversary of the Declaration of the Turkish Republic on Thursday.
(Staton R.
Winter/New York Times Photo) (NYT25) SAFRANBOLU, Turkey --Oct.
28, 1998 --TURKEY-ANNIVERSARY-1, 10-28 -- A group of Turkish boys holds a banner depicting Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, the founder of modern Turkey, as an adult directs the raising of the banner in the town of Safranbolu on Tuesday.
Like tens of millions of Turks across the country this week, they are joining in celebrations of their country's 75th birthday, which takes place Thursday.
(Staton R.
Winter/New York Times Photo) *LITE (NYT24) NEW YORK --Oct.
28, 1998 --ABT-BALLET, 10-28 -- Cecilia Bartoli and Angel Corella at City Center on Ballet Theater's opening night.
It was a perfect match: young Italian mezzo-soprano superstar (Bartoli) meets young Spanish ballet virtuoso (Corella) and both knock out audience at Tuesday night's chock-full-of-chuckles gala.
(Sara Krulwich/New York Times Photo) (NYT23) NEW YORK --Oct.
28, 1998 --ISRAEL-FILMS, 10-28 -- Amos Gitai, director of ``Day After Day,'' part of the Israeli film festival.
``This is not a society that is outlined or completely established,'' says Gitai, trying to explain the dynamics of the Middle East peace process.
``It's volcanic, abrupt, with a reality that's constantly destabilized.
It's a place where the great events of history crawl into the bedroom and don't leave you a moment of silence''.
(Joyce Dopkeen/New York Times Photo) *LITE (NYT22) NEW YORK --Oct.
28, 1998 --CARTER-MUSIC-2, 10-28 -- Elliott Carter at his 90th birthday concert.
There is a fastidiousness in Carter's ear for colors and the way he separates them one from another.
The notes of a single horizontal line often fragment and pass from one instrument to the next; silences let in light.
Perhaps this is why music so dense with diverse agendas can sound so clear.
(G. Paul Burnett/New York Times Photo) (NYT21) NEW YORK --Oct.
28, 1998 --CARTER-MUSIC-1, 10-28 -- William Purvis conducting the Speculum Musicae at Elliott Carter's 90th birthday concert.
The tribute was a showcase for the new and the recent.
Only the eminent Double Concerto (1961) and a brief song written 60 years ago looked very far into the past.
(G. Paul Burnett/New York Times Photo) (NYT20) NEW YORK --Oct.
28, 1998 --WOLF-THEATER, 10-28 -- Kate Blumberg, as a child, with Larry Bryggman in Hilary Bell's ``Wolf Lullaby''.
Ms. Bell's 75-minute play, set in a town in Tasmania, is more intriguing for questions it raises than for how it embodies them dramatically.
(Sara Krulwich/New York Times Photo) (NYT19) NEW YORK --Oct.
28, 1998 --LOUIS-DANCE-REVIEW, 10-28 -- Pamela Levy-Arauz, left, and Kimberly Gibilisco of Murray Louis and Nikolais Dance performing ``Millennium Loop'' at the Joyce on Tuesday.
The dance technique Nikolais and Louis developed emphasizes quick, precise movements and these performers showed their mastery of it as they darted and hopped in a slightly staccato manner.
(Andrea Mohin/New York Times Photo) (NYT18) UNDATED --Oct.
28, 1998 --HOME IMPROVEMENT-B&AMP;W, 10-28 -- Many homeowners become complacent about home security because they think they have nothing worth stealing.
What these homeowners fail to realize is that a majority of burglars have no way of knowing what is inside a home.
Most break in hoping to get lucky.
Given enough time, a burglar will try to make his own luck by tearing into a house.
(Edward R.
Lipinski/New York Times Illustration) *LITE (NYT17) YONKERS, N.Y. --Oct.
28, 1998 --NY-PATAKI-PROFILE, 10-28 -- Gov.
George Pataki and Sen.
Alfonse D'Amato head to a campaign rally in Yonkers on Wednesday.
Pataki has made a career of being underestimated, and a habit of defying expectations.
And in the four years since his election, he has done just that, with considerable success.
(Andrea Mohin/New York Times Photo) (NYT16) UNDATED --Oct.
28, 1998 --MARTHASTEWART-PRETENDERS-2, 10-28 -- Pumpkin carving of Martha Stewart by Hugh McMahon.
Armed with little more than a sheaf of recipes, a glue gun, some dried flowers and a puritanical zeal for modern homekeeping, Martha Stewart has built a $200 million multimedia empire.
Thus, it comes as no surprise that pretenders are cropping up thicker than sprouts on a chia pet.
(Abe Frajndlich/New York Times Photo) (NYT15) NEW YORK --Oct.
28, 1998 --CIR-NEWYORKER-CARTOONS, 10-28 -- Bob Mankoff, cartoon editor for The New Yorker, in his vast cartoon archive.
He holds a laptop showing his Web site, Cartoon.com, which will soon add thousands of the magazine's cartoons.
(James Estrin/New York Times Photo) (NYT14) NEW YORK --Oct.
28, 1998 --CIR-MULTI-PLAYER-GAMES, 10-28 -- Daniel Shiffman, a self-proclaimed geek, is an elite player of the on-line game called Myth: The Fallen Lords.
In Myth, each player can fight on line against everyone else, or competitors can form teams and carry out intricate strategies.
(Susan B.
Markisz/New York Times Photo) *LITE (NYT13) NEW YORK --Oct.
28, 1998 --CIR-FASHION, 10-28 -- Betty Lo Mann and Steve Mann are connected by marriage as well as the matching cyborg suits designed by Mann.
``We understand each other more when we are connected,'' Ms.
Mann says.
``It's the same way the left side of your brain is connected to the right side of your body, and so is the right side.
There is no argument between the two sides''.
(Brian Willer/New York Times Photo) (NYT12) ST.
LOUIS --Oct.
28, 1998 --CIR-HOME-SCHOOL-2, 10-28 -- Mary and Bill Pride, right, use 10 computers to teach, from left, Madeleine, Lillian, Gregory, Mercy, Frank, Magda, Sarah, Joe and Theodore.
A survey of home schoolers in Florida has revealed a shift in recent years in the reasons for choosing home schooling: dissatisfaction with public and private schools was listed first most often, moving ahead of religious reasons.
(Tim Parker/New York Times Photo) (NYT11) ST.
LOUIS --Oct.
28, 1998 --CIR-HOME-SCHOOL-1, 10-28 -- Mary Pride, publisher of Practical Homeschooling, with some of her children, who are educated at home.
In the 1990s, the number of home schoolers has tripled, and many participating families say they see home schooling as an alternative to mediocre public schools and expensive private schools.
(Tim Parker/New York Times Photo) *LITE (NYT10) BETHEL, Alaska --Oct.
28, 1998 --CLASSROOM-AFTERMATH-BOS, 10-28 -- ``Josh's Place'' is carefully lettered on a backboard on a court where Josh Palacios played and near where he lived.
Palacios and the principal of Bethel Regional High School, Ron Edwards, were killed late last year by Evan Ramsey in the school's lobby.
(Mark Wilson/Boston Globe Photo) (NYT9) BETHEL, Alaska --Oct.
28, 1998 --CLASSROOM-PLOT-BOS, 10-28 -- A crucifix and a button help Claudia Palacios keep alive the memory of her slain son, Josh.
A sophomore basketball player at Bethel Regional High School, Josh was shot and killed in the school's lobby late last year by 16-year-old Evan Ramsey.
(Mark Wilson/Boston Globe Photo) (NYT8) ANCHORAGE, Alaska --Oct.
28, 1998 --CLASSROOM-RAGE-BOS, 10-28 -- Evan Ramsey, at the Cook Inlet Pre-Trial Facility in Anchorage, is awaiting sentencing Dec.
1 for what is expected to be a life term in state prison.
Late last year, Evan, then 16, walked into the lobby of Bethel Regional High, pulled a gun to his hip, and began shooting.
(Mark Wilson/Boston Globe Photo) (NYT7) UNDATED --Oct.
28, 1998 --MARTHASTEWART-PRETENDERS-1, 10-28 -- Home-decorating gurus challenging Martha Stewart include (from left, with their Halloween projects) Chris Casson Madden on ``nesting'' with nesting chaise; Bari Lynn with mannequin-scarecrows; Barbara Smith with tree; Colin Cowie with flowers; Mary Emmerling with basket.
Front, seated: Lynette Jennings with centerpiece and Katie Brown with bowls.
(Abe Frajndlich/New York Times Photo) *LITE (NYT6) NEW YORK --Oct.
28, 1998 --NY-SUBWAY-PRESERVE, 10-28 -- In a preservation move both bold and unprecedented, the entire New York City subway system will be nominated to the National Register of Historic Places.
Wall Street's station, with vintage oak booth, stands to gain if the subway is on the National Register.
(Marilyn K.
Yee/New York Times Photo) (NYT5) NEW YORK --Oct.
28, 1998 --NY-BRONX-GARDEN-2, 10-28 -- Who says vegetables must be planted in rows?
The serpentine garden can be seen growing at Wave Hill, the public garden in the Riverdale section of the Bronx, known for its imagination and unusual plants.
(Suzanne DeChillo/New York Times Photo) (NYT4) NEW YORK --Oct.
28, 1998 --NY-BRONX-GARDEN-1, 10-28 -- Marco Polo Stufano checks on his balsam pare at Wave Hill in New York.
There's a proud green serpent of vegetables undulating over the grass at Wave Hill, the public garden in the Riverdale section of the Bronx, known for its imagination and unusual plants.
(Suzanne DeChillo/New York Times Photo) (NYT3) LONDON --Oct.
28, 1998 --ARGENTINA-BRITAIN-FLOATER, 10-28 -- President of Argentina Carlos Menem, left, is followed by Britain's Prince Phillip while reviewing an honor guard at Buckingham Palace in London on Wednesday.
Menem is the first Argentine president to visit Britain since the 1982 war over the Falkland Islands which Argentina claims as the Malvinas.
Nearly 1,000 soldiers were killed in the brief but bloody battle over the islands in the South Atlantic.
(Presidencia de la Nacion/New York Times Photo) (NYT2) ATLANTA --Oct.
28, 1998 --NY-MARATHON-THUGWANE-2, 10-28 -- Josia Thugwane of South Africa winnng the 1996 Olympic Marathon in Atlanta.
With a personal best of 2 hours 7 minutes 28 seconds, Thugwane, now 27, enters Sunday's New York City Marathon as the fastest competitor.
(Barton Silverman/New York Times Photo) (NYT1) NEW YORK --Oct.
28, 1998 --NY-MARATHON-THUGWANE-1, 10-28 -- Josia Thugwane of South Africa, the 1996 Olympic marathon champion, has quit his custodial job at a coal mine to become a full-time athlete.
He enters Sunday's New York City Marathon as the fastest competitor in a deep field of Kenyan, Mexican, Moroccan and Spanish challengers.
(G. Paul Burnett/New York Times Photo) The New York Times News Service
PHILADELPHIA (AP) --Kim Dunderdale doesn't have to worry about her kids running into violence at school -- they're at home, like thousands of others across the country.
``When we first decided to home school our oldest daughter, we didn't say we wanted to keep our children out of public school and away from all the horrible things that go on there,'' said Dunderdale, a Pittsburgh woman who teaches three of her five children, the oldest of whom is in eighth grade.
``But over the years, we are glad our children are shielded from those things,'' she said.
Last week's shootings at a Littleton, Colo.
, high school that left 15 people dead reminded the more than 700,000 U.S. families that teach their children at home why they chose to take their children out of school.
Many abhor what they consider immorality, violence and peer pressure in the nation's school systems.
``I am trying to shelter them from negative influences, foul language, lack of respect for authority, lack of respect for themselves or others.
It is those kinds of things that led to the Littleton thing,'' said Kurt Boese of Lodi, Calif.
, where he home schools his three children.
Teaching children at home has gradually moved into the educational mainstream.
Unlike 15 years ago, each state now recognizes the parental right to home school and all states have legislation or case law governing academic standards.
An estimated 1.7 million children are taught at home across the country, according to the Home School Legal Defense Association.
The reasons given by parents are varied --religious guidelines, the desire to spend more time with their kids, a better education, concern about morals taught at school.
It is a burden, however.
``Home schooling your children because you fear violence and fear what will happen to them will not take you through the rough times,'' said Cindy McKeown, a mother of four from Middletown.
``It is a tremendous sacrifice of time, finances.
You have to home school because you believe it is the best option for this child''.
And home schooling cannot prevent tragedy or keep kids from growing up, said Ruth Blount, who home schools her six children in Nantucket, Mass.
``There's always a risk with children.
Something horrible could happen in our family even if we home school,'' Mrs.
Blount said.
``At a certain point, your kid's going to have to choose on their own.
But when you home school, you have the time with them to plant those seeds more easily.''
The technology of home schooling has provided business opportunities on several levels.
Tammy and Dan Kihlstadius, a Bloomington, Minn.
, couple with seven home-schooled children, established an online computer reselling business and software review publication catering to Christian home schoolers in the early 1990s (www.homecomputermarket.com).
Their reselling business now averages about 100 orders a month, with business from Appalachian hill families as well as affluent home schoolers from around the world.
Their first computer guide was published in 1993 with only four pages and was handed out free at home-schooling conventions.
Today, they charge $7 for their ``Home-schooler's Computer Guide,'' which is more than 100 pages long and contains reviews of more than 300 educational software titles.
Their annual catalog includes a section called ``100 Programs You Should Not Buy'' and notes if a title features witchcraft, magic or aliens.
``I don't have a problem with aliens as long as they're not mean or nasty, but some of our readers don't like software with aliens,'' Mrs.
Kihlstadius said.
Wendy and David Orth, a Cherry Valley, Mass.
, couple with six home-schooled children, have built the gigantic, Homeschool Publishing House(bravewc.com/hph), which produces the ``Homeschool Seller'' catalogue.
The Orths list home schoolers' used supplies in the catalog at no charge, and when a sale is made, the home schooler pays them 15 percent of the sale price.
``It pays its own bills, but my husband certainly can't quit his day job,'' Mrs.
Orth said.
Most of the items listed are Christian-themed.
Major educational publishers are eyeing the scene, but so far few heavy hitters have embraced the home-schooling market.
The notable exception is Paul Allen, a co-founder of Microsoft.
Vulcan Northwest, his 12-year-old umbrella organization for his business ventures, is backing a new online tutorial called APEX (Advance Placement Excellence).
APEX, an advanced-placement tutorial, is in its pilot phase (www.apex.netu.com).
The first course is advanced placement calculus.
This winter, the curriculum will be expanded to include microeconomics and American government.
The goal is to add five more courses next year and five more each each subsequent year.
The courses have been designed in cooperation with the College Board, which oversees advanced placement classes _ college-level courses offered to high-school students that can count toward college credits.
The company's is aiming to attract business from both the home-schooling and the institutional schooling markets.
For $300 per semester, a student can tap into a library of 15-minute teacher-narrated tutorials with multimedia animations of key concepts; participate in bulletin board discussion sessions, and complete both online and off-line homework.
The activities go into a database and can be reviewed, critiqued and ``debugged'' by the teacher.
The calculus course involves more than 250 learning activities.
Between 30 and 40 students are taking it this fall, but as many as 150 could participate in the microeconomics and government courses.
My daughter isn't ready for kindergarten yet.
Which is good, because neither am I.
The biggest question _ public vs.
private education _ quickly breaks into myriad other questions, all crucial and all confusing.
As dissatisfaction with the state of American education grows, the alternatives also grow, creating a plethora of hard-to-evaluate choices.
Public education has deep roots in our society.
A vast empire involving almost 50 million young people, 88,000 schools and trillions of dollars, public schools long have been the social balancing wheel of society, fostering diverse interests, dreams and goals.
Americans stood by public education through integration in the 1960s, the burgeoning magnet and alternative schools in the 1970s and the draconian financial cuts of the 1980s.
But attitudes have shifted in the 1990s.
In a recent study titled ``Where Connoisseurs Send Their Children to School,'' Denis Doyle, educational analyst and senior fellow at the Hudson Institute in Washington, reported that urban public-school teachers are more likely to send their children to private schools.
In Jersey City, N.J., 50.3 percent choose private schools.
In San Francisco, it's 36.7 percent, Cleveland is at 39.7 percent and Chicago at 36.3 percent.
``And let's not forget home schooling,'' Doyle says.
``It's the fastest-growing trend in the country''.
Brenda and Tommy Teepell of Baton Rouge, La.
, have home schooled their four sons, now ages 23, 22, 17 and 14.
The boys were in a Christian school when the Teepells decided to make the change.
``I wanted more of our family values to be part of our children's lives,'' she says.
``The boys participated in plenty of outside activities, such as sports and the 4-H Club.
``Life simply turned into a big classroom,'' she adds.
``If we went shopping, the boys calculated prices.
Traveling was a rich history lesson.
The boys matured faster than their peers, and are extremely independent young men''.
Approximately 1.2 million children are home schooled, according to the National Home Education Research Institute in Salem, Ore.
Catholic schools, because of their affordability and diversity, remain a leading private option for middle-class parents.
And parochial schools score high academically.
Between 1993 and 1996, parochial enrollment increased by almost 590,000, according to the Washington-based National Catholic Educational Association.
Private institutions are flourishing across the country.
The Hudson Institute says there are 28,000 private schools nationwide, with 5.9 million children enrolled, and that private enrollment has risen faster than public for the past five years.
Clearly, private education is not everyone's favorite option.
Many parents and educators insist that public education is the cornerstone of democracy.
``Education is not just academics _ it's socialization, real America with all its glory and depravity,'' says Michael Castleman, a public-school advocate and an author who specializes in health.
``It's a tremendous commitment,'' adds Castleman, whose two children survived a difficult search for a public school in San Francisco.
San Francisco has 15 alternative sites and 59 regular elementary schools.
Castleman and his wife, Anne, along with several hundred hopeful families, opted for an alternative program.
The couple investigated a dozen schools, keenly aware that their chance of obtaining a spot in one of the city's five most sought-after alternatives was slim.
San Francisco has open enrollment, a process that offers a modicum of choice: An application places the child's name in a lottery.
Only a handful of families get into their schools of choice, but the lottery takes certain ZIP codes, a previously enrolled sibling and ethnic balance into account.
In their search, the Castlemans uncovered an alternative school that many of their peers had overlooked.
``San Francisco Community Alternative School sits in the middle of San Francisco's working-class stew,'' Castleman says.
``It's ethnically and economically diverse.
It's not everybody's first choice, due to location and no after-school care.
We were delighted to receive our letter of acceptance without having to contend with the arduous appeal process''.
Ginny Gjedsted and her husband, Al, did not fare well in the open-enrollment lottery.
They also were reluctant to gamble on an appeal, so they enrolled their two daughters in an ecclesiastical girls' school.
Within a year, however, they moved them to a private, secular, coed school.
``The rhetoric and the reality of the prestigious girls' institution didn't match,'' Gjedsted says.
By the time the Gjedsteds' third child entered preschool, tuition for three hovered around $30,000.
``It's a hefty chunk of our salaries, but I can't quibble with the education,'' she says.
Educator Joe Nathan, director of the Center for School Change at the University of Minnesota's Hubert H.
Humphrey Institute of Public Affairs and author of ``Charter Schools: Creating Hope and Opportunity in American Education'' (Jossey-Bass Publishers, 1996), thinks public schools have failed to help many youngsters reach their potential.
Nathan, who also co-founded the charter-school movement, says the cards are stacked against children's being steered toward their highest potential.
``Achievement and accountability are not emphasized,'' he says.
``Schools receive no extra federal or state monies for parent participation or high test scores _ many innovative educators feel stifled''.
Nathan cites numerous examples throughout his book of teachers' successes which have been marginalized, their ideas ignored or challenged.
In 1991, Nathan helped spearhead the Minnesota charter-school movement, a reform in public education that has spread to 29 states.
Charters are public schools in which teachers, parents and community members work together to decide on educational programs and curricula.
As public schools, receiving tax money, they are accountable to the state, as well as to the parents and the community, for academic results.
But they operate independently of most district and state regulations, cutting through bureaucratic red tape that may hinder other public schools.
Not every parent feels the need for such innovations as charter schools, open enrollment or lotteries.
Lloyd and Lori Thacker of Portland, Ore.
, sent their elder son, Jacob, to a suburban neighborhood school.
They feel lucky.
``It wasn't a perfect school, but Jacob received a solid education,'' says Lloyd Thacker, who himself is a counselor at a Jesuit-run private high school.
Yet Lori Thacker admits she wonders if 5-year-old Sam will get the same education as his brother.
``I feel burdened by recent local tax attitudes,'' she says.
``People don't understand the relationship between the polls and public schools''.
Last year, Portland followed a growing trend: Like one in four local districts nationwide, its voters rejected higher property taxes _ a boost for property owners, but a blow for schools, which are funded by federal money and local property taxes.
Fiscal cuts often mean fewer enrichment programs and more leaky roofs.
The educational schism isn't likely to disappear anytime soon.
More choice, not less, is the wave of the future.
These dichotomies have taught me to prioritize and become proactive in my search.
I've learned to compare schools and family needs, to look into after-school programs, computers, art, libraries, physical education and more.
I've become accustomed to asking questions, talking to principals and networking with other parents.
But even so, the process isn't simple.
Even with the amount of data I've uncovered, I'm still not sure which route _ public or private _ my daughter will take when she starts school.
&UR; (Stephanie Levin-Gervasi is a San Francisco-based free-lance writer).
&LR; &UR; (To publish this article, it must be purchased _ the rate is not prohibitive _ from New York Times Syndicate sales representative CONNIE WHITE in Kansas City at 1-800-444-0267 or 816-822-8448, or by fax at 816-822-1444).
&QL; &UR; (She also has information on how to subscribe to LifeBeat, a weekly package of five intriguing articles with color art).
&QL; &UR; ------------------------------------------------ &QC;
(a) &QL; (For use by N.Y.
Times News Service clients)(a) &QL; &QL; The Arizona Republic plans to move the following stories for use by clients of the NYTimes News Service for Tuesday, Aug.
29. If you have any questions, please call The Republic News Desk at (602) 444-8286.
POLYGAMIST (Colorado City, Ariz).
- School opens in Colorado City.
Nearly 700 students don't show up, as the fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints begins its ambitious home-schooling and private schooling project.
Church leaders warn about the evils of the outside world.
Parents kept their students out of school, the latest in a series of events of the church saying they want to withdraw from society and to keep alien ideas out of the town.
Meanwhile, as 350 students did go school, dozens of students from the fundalmentalist families were riding motorcycles and tractors around town.
By MARK SHAFFER.
Story will move in the ``A'' category.
PACKARD (Undated) {ndash} A Phoenix man puts up for auction the rights to the famous Packard automobile name, along with the prototype car he built hoping to resurrect the company.
The Packard Motor Car Company goes on the block in Auburn, Ind.
, at the Kruse International classic car auction, and on eBay, which owns Kruse.
By BOB GOLFEN.
Story will move in the ``A'' category.
&UR; Close to Home &LR; When Mae Shell was a child, her parents homesteaded in Washington State, building their own houses and living off the land, for a time without running water.
So when it came time to educate Mae and her three younger sisters, the method they chose seemed to fit right in _ teaching them at home in the small town of Georgia, Vt.
``We did it pretty informally,'' said Ms.
Shell, now 21.
``It was very self-directed.
We did horseback riding at a stable nearby.
We went everywhere with my mom, to the grocery store, to run errands, to the theater.
Math was kind of the only thing we really sat down at our desks to do''.
Ms. Shell said she did not read until she was 8, which she realizes is considered late.
She and her sisters also had little interaction with the local schools or the state system, and didn't take standardized tests.
``There wasn't really anything we wanted to do in school,'' she said, ``or that we thought the school had for us''.
They received diplomas and transcripts from their parents, who lobbied unsuccessfully against a change in Vermont law requiring home-schooled students to submit a portfolio of work to the state or have their work reviewed by certified teachers.
``We were concerned about how much control the state would have over how home schools worked,'' Ms.
Shell said.
``True learning takes place when it is directed by the person who needs to be learning it.
In the public schools it's sort of forced on the kids''.
At 17, she took a few classes at a local community college.
She enjoyed a short-fiction class, but found it difficult to be given an assignment to write.
She preferred to be naturally inspired and did not like ``learning in such a formal way,'' she said.
She was much more excited about working in the public library in nearby St.
Albans, where she began volunteering at 16.
She considered going to college and trying to get a master's degree in library science, but ``No college in Vermont offers that,'' she said, ``and I didn't really feel like I wanted to go out of state at that point''.
So while two of Ms.
Shell's younger sisters went to college (one is at Smith College, the other at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst), Ms.
Shell decided to live at home and get a paying job at the library, where she maintains the Web page, enters catalogued books into the computer and takes books to nursing homes and shut-ins.
Sue Wade, a librarian at St.
Albans Free Library, said that compared with children educated conventionally, the Shell daughters were ``more mature in a lot of ways and less mature in some ways''.
``They have no problem talking with adults,'' she said.
``But sometimes they seem nave about certain things.
They haven't had to be kids.
They've just had to be people''.
They have had little experience with the kind of competition or teasing common among schoolchildren, she observed, because they spent their time among family members.
``They may not understand why people would even tease someone in a cruel way,'' she added.
She said home-schooled children, who are relatively common in the St.
Albans community, seem to ``do things that are less likely to put themselves in situations where they have to be cutthroat, because they haven't had to be,'' Ms.
Wade said.
``They have been often raised by people who are potters or farmers.
One of the home-schoolers has a father who is a produce manager.
That's about as competitive as it gets''.
Last year, in Growing Without Schooling, a magazine about unschooling, Ms.
Shell wrote of her only complaint: ``I feel very separated from my schooled peers because of seemingly insurmountable differences in our values.
I have many friends, but they are all significantly younger or older than me.
I often feel lonely, and long for friends my own age who are going through the same experiences as I am''.
She has dated but finds it hard to meet many men her age.
Still, she says that for now she is happy living with her parents: her father builds wooden boats, and her mother is a former potter who went back to college several years ago to get a master's in counseling.
Ms. Shell helps out at home by doing the grocery shopping and chauffeuring her youngest sister to dance classes.
She also writes poetry and designs Web pages.
``I really like it here,'' she said.
``I don't feel the need to go anywhere else''.
&UR; A Life With Great Books &LR; School just wasn't working out well for Emily Murphy.
A bright child who started reading as a toddler, Ms.
Murphy puzzled her teachers, who seemed uncertain where to place her.
``They were shipping me off to gifted classes in the morning, putting me in higher grades,'' recalled Ms.
Murphy, now 25.
``One teacher in first grade took an irrational hatred to me.
I was really unhappy.
The other kids would kind of pick on me because I was different''.
Teachers were also so critical of her handwriting, saying it was illegible, that she hated to write.
After third grade, her parents decided to teach her at home, where she could proceed at her own pace.
There was an added advantage: stability.
Ms. Murphy's father worked for a railroad and had to move the family every couple of years, settling finally in Wellsboro, a small town in central Pennsylvania.
Home schooling ``fit the transient life style,'' she said.
Ms. Murphy's parents worked to help her feel comfortable writing.
She would dictate essays, and her father would write them down, until ``it got to the point where he couldn't write as fast as I would dictate,'' Ms.
Murphy said, ``so I got frustrated and I would just write it myself.
I doubt the school system would have had the patience''.
On Sunday evenings, they held sessions to review what Ms.
Murphy and her younger brother and sister, also home schooled, had accomplished and to set goals for the following week.
``Some of them could be very tense,'' Ms.
Murphy said.
``We did clash quite a bit when I was a kid _ `I don't want to do this'; `You have to do this'.
'' Her parents, now both English professors at Mansfield University, in Mansfield, Pa.
, decided that the children should take standardized tests and submit work to schools for approval.
``The way you beat the system is to learn how to do standardized tests really well,'' Ms.
Murphy said.
She also took classes in dance, drama and art, enrolled in courses at a community college, and by 13, was working in a local library and in a historical society's rare-books collection.
Her parents encouraged their children to talk to adults about their work, including the plumbers and electricians who came to the house.
``My parents had the attitude that the world is not made up of 30 people your own age,'' she said.
Ms. Murphy always intended to go to college, and scored a combined score of 1330 on the SAT's.
But one of the two schools she applied to, Penn State, ``basically sent me a rejection letter because I didn't fit into their system,'' she said.
The other school, St.
John's College, a small institution in Maryland, accepted her.
She felt right at home with its ``great books'' curriculum.
She said colleges seemed to be more receptive to home-schoolers by the time her siblings applied.
Both chose Williams College.
Now Ms.
Murphy is an assistant registrar and curator of photographs at the Maryland State Archives in Annapolis.
She squeezes a social life into her busy schedule but says she hasn't had time to date.
Her answering machine's outgoing message features quotes from Jane Austen and Emily Dickinson.
Would she home school her own children?
``My mom is a saint,'' she answered.
``I have no clue how she managed to handle three kids, all very bright, all rambunctious.
I don't know that I would have the patience to do it''. &QL;
BURLINGTON, Vt.
(AP) --A home-schooling mother was released from jail Tuesday after spending nearly two weeks behind bars in a dispute with public school officials over her son's special education needs.
In a case closely watched by advocates of school choice, Karen Maple was set free by the judge who had jailed her on contempt charges on Sept.
1. She had refused to follow an order to take her 15-year-old son, Trevor, to Vermont's child protection agency so his education needs could be evaluated.
In setting Ms.
Maple free, Judge Michael Kupersmith threatened to fine her $100 a day if she doesn't take Trevor to the agency on Friday.
Ms. Maple said she didn't know where her son was, although she believed he was staying with friends.
``I don't want my son locked up and treated the way I've been treated for the last two weeks,'' the 36-year-old single mother said, weeping, after the hearing.
``He's now considered a fugitive and he's just a child''.
William Young, the commissioner of the child welfare agency, said officials had no intentions of locking up Trevor.
``Many of the children in our custody are at home,'' he said.
The case has drawn wide attention and sympathy for Ms.
Maple. About 30 people demonstrated in her support outside the courthouse Tuesday and then lined the spectators' gallery during her hearing.
An editorial last Friday in The Wall Street Journal said cases like Ms.
Maple's extend ``beyond the issue of home schooling to the fundamental rights of families to raise their children the way they see fit''.
Vermont parents are allowed to school their children at home but must submit an annual report to the state Department of Education describing the academic program.
But Ms.
Maple and her local school district in Bakersfield were unable to agree on an education plan for Trevor, and administrators decided Trevor needed special education services because he was behind on reading and other language skills.
Ms. Maple says her son loves science, is a whiz at math and that they're working on his language skills.
She said she's agreed to have a tutor brought in to help Trevor with language skills.
Ms. Maple has said she resented school officials' intrusion into her family's life.
Kupersmith granted Ms.
Maple's release Tuesday on a motion by the state Department of Corrections, which argued that the state needs its scarce jail beds for violent offenders.
``This case is supposed to be about the best interests of the child,'' the judge said.
``While Ms.
Maple is incarcerated, all of T.M.'s (Trevor Maple's) interests are being ignored''.
Kupersmith also acknowledged that continuing Maple's incarceration ``is not likely to ensure the appearance of her son.''
CHICAGO _ Education has always been a local issue in America.
Now an increasing number of parents are choosing to make it even more local: they are doing it themselves.
The number of Americans teaching their own children has more than tripled since the beginning of the decade.
Home-schooling groups put the number of students learning at home at 1.23 million, or slightly more than all the public-school students in New Jersey.
Such numbers are notoriously imprecise, since some of the most populous states, such as Texas and Illinois, collect no meaningful data on home schooling.
Still, experts reckon that the number of families teaching their children at home has exploded over the past decade and is growing by at least 15 percent a year.
Why? Twenty years ago home schooling was a hippie habit, the natural complement to free love and natural healing.
But the flower children soon had strange bedfellows.
In the mid-1980s, home schooling was embraced by Christian fundamentalists as a means of providing family-based religious and moral education.
Recently, there has been a boom in secular home schoolers who are dissatisfied with public schools.
The Florida Department of Education has for years sent a crude survey to home schoolers asking them why they withdrew from the regular system.
Two years ago, for the first time, dissatisfaction with the public schools was a more common answer than religious preference.
According to Mary Anne Pitman, an educational anthropologist at the University of Cincinnati, one fast-growing group of home schoolers is black professionals, worried by the lack of safe, effective public schools for their children.
Two decades ago, home schooling was illegal in many states and strongly discouraged in most others.
Students were hunted down as truants; parents were arrested and sometimes even jailed.
All 50 states now allow it, though the degree of regulation varies enormously.
In Minnesota, home schoolers must register, check in regularly, and take part in standardized exams to make sure the children are not falling behind.
In Illinois, they are virtually unregulated.
Some states have become downright accommodating.
Washington and Iowa require the public schools to enroll children on a part-time basis if they ask for it.
In California, children can enroll in an independent study program through a public school and then do their studying at home.
Not surprisingly, the busiest opponents of all this are school administrators, particularly superintendents.
They can be expected to have a belief in public schools, of course, but not all their concerns are so well-intentioned.
In most states, schools are financed according to the number of pupils attending.
``Superintendents see every kid who doesn't come in as a potential $6,000 loss,'' says Michael Farris, the president of the Home School Legal Defense Association (HSLDA).
The teachers' unions are not fond of home schooling, either.
The National Education Association handbook declares that ``home schooling programs cannot provide the student with a comprehensive education experience''.
Yet the legal climate has changed, in large part, because home schoolers have developed into a potent political and legal force.
Their association with the Christian right has earned them strong Republican backing.
They are also very good at bare-knuckle, grass-roots politics.
The HSLDA has a staff of 50, including seven lawyers, who lobby on Capitol Hill but also pick fights at the state level.
When a Michigan couple was arrested in 1985 for teaching their child at home without a teacher's license, the HSLDA fought the case all the way to the Michigan Supreme Court, where the law requiring home-schooling parents to be licensed teachers was struck down as unconstitutional.
Farris boasts that he can generate 100 telephone calls to every congressional office within a matter of hours.
At the same time, public opinion on home schooling has shifted.
When the Phi Delta Kappa/Gallup poll on public attitudes towards education first asked about home schooling in 1985, 73 percent of those surveyed said it was a bad thing, compared with 16 percent who approved.
When the same question was asked in 1997, the objectors had fallen to 57 percent and the supporters had more than doubled, to 36 percent.
Favorable stories about home schooling are starting to creep into mainstream magazines.
Amazon.com, the biggest Internet bookseller, now lists over 200 books on the subject.
But what happens to the children?
The HSLDA claims that, on average, home-schooled students outperform their public-school peers by more than 30 percentage points in all subjects, and that the longer a child is schooled at home the larger the test gap grows.
The figures may be tilted, and home-schooled students, whose parents are an exacting bunch, would probably do well in public schools too.
Still, home schooling is not creating a generation of dullards.
Harvard has seen fit to accept a handful of these children over the past two decades.
``Some of these kids are absolutely terrific.
They've done interesting things,'' says David Illingworth, the senior admissions officer.
Illingworth has challenged the movement to find a better name, since many of its most successful students have taken some courses in public schools and even in community colleges.
The picture of a mother working with her children around the kitchen table does not do justice to the idea, he says.
And there is a harder question: is it possible to develop socially without ever going to school?
Home schoolers argue that their children are exposed to children and adults of varying ages rather than becoming ``peer-dependent''.
Farris decided to begin educating his six-year-old daughter at home when he realized that she cared more about the approval of other six-year-olds than she did about her own family.
``Real life,'' he says, ``does not consist of age-segregated herds''.
Harvard's Illingworth says the sociability of home-schooled applicants varies as much as it does among ordinary ones.
The exceptions come from religious families who have deliberately withdrawn their children from a world they consider tainted.
One shadow lies over home schooling.
Joe Nathan, a senior fellow at the Hubert Humphrey Institute at the University of Minnesota, has spent much time interviewing parents who teach at home.
Most want to give their children a better education; but a tiny minority are dangerously racist, angry or alienated.
``There are some real haters,'' says Nathan.
In general, he considers home schooling to be a good thing for bringing change to the public schools; many home schoolers have already been drawn back into the system by charter schools and other such experiments.
But there is a worrying group lurking in the home-schooling shadows.
Even so, most home-schooling parents choose to teach their children at home at great cost to themselves because they reckon the public schools are missing the mark; and, in many cases, they are right.
A surge of defections may finally send a wake-up call to the whole public system.
Rather than merely talking of change, it is time to bring some about.
&QL; &UR; ___________________ &LR; &QC; &UR; (To publish this fascinating 1,200-word article, it must be purchased _ the rate is not prohibitive _ from New York Times Syndicate sales representative CONNIE WHITE in Kansas City at 1-800-444-0267 or 816-822-8448, or fax her at 816-822-1444).
&LR; &QL; &LR; &QL; &UR; (EDITORS: Please note that this article is NOT available to clients in Canada EXCEPT to The Toronto Globe &AMP; Mail).
&LR; &QL;
DES MOINES, Iowa (AP) --Republican presidential contender Gary Bauer said Tuesday that school voucher proposals should be expanded to cover the cost to parents of educating their children at home.
Bauer noted that most school voucher proposals provide funds for moving children to private schools or public schools outside the home district but don't include home schooling.
``The politicians didn't think very much about this particular alternative,'' he said.
``This is a legitimate choice and I want to make sure the playing field is level''.
The proposal came as Bauer met with a group of parents who home-school their children.
Voucher programs allow parents the freedom to take the education funding earmarked for their child and use it to pay the costs of attending a school other than their neighborhood public school.
Most of the debate is over whether tax money for public school students should be used for tuition at private schools.
Public school advocates say that undermines public education, but most conservatives favor that step.
Bauer favors voucher programs for private schools, but expanded that Tuesday to include home schooling.
He said parents could use the money for curriculum material, or to hire help in areas where they don't feel competent to teach.
Home-school advocates won a years-long legislative battle that allows them to teach their children at home.
Many are religious conservatives unhappy with the public school curriculum and the lack of religious instruction.
Bauer is appealing to these conservatives in his bid for the Republican presidential nomination.
He made it clear he would favor home schooling if he's elected.
``I will never allow the federal government to get into the business of regulating home schooling,'' said Bauer.
He argued that there's some history of youngsters who are taught at home, and they measure up well against students taught in both private and public schools.
``If the parents are engaged, the children are in pretty good shape,'' said Bauer.
``Those of you who are engaged in home schooling are doing something incredibly important for your children''.
Under Iowa law, parents do not have to be licensed teachers to home-school youngsters.
They register youngsters with the local school district, which has staffers who will offer assistance and advice.
The youngsters are tested periodically and can take part in some extracurricular activities.
Bauer said advocates won that law by pressuring politicians, and demonstrated effectiveness.
``At the end of the day, politicians fear unemployment more than anything,'' he said.
BOSTON _ When naming their three black boys, Michelle and Alan Shaw chose words that would underscore treasured roots and religion: Chinua, Nigerian for God's own blessing; Yesuto, Ghanaian for belongs to Jesus; and Obasi, Nigerian for in honor of God.
So, when it came to selecting the best school for their boys, the Dorchester couple _ she an attorney with a Harvard law degree, he a computer expert with a master's and doctorate from MIT _ took the same care.
Home, they decided, was the best place to teach their children strong academics, religious values, and instill their own sense of ethnic pride.
``For black people in this country, there is a need for not letting our kids forget their history,'' saidAlan Shaw, whose sons are 3, 6, and 7.
``We shouldn't look to something that's been designed by the state as a way for us to teach our kids about their past and their future''.
Fueled by a desire to rescue their children from academic failure and neglect at the hands of overburdened public schools and determined to weave tight-knit families, more African-Americans and other minorities nationwide are deciding that when it comes to school, there's no place like home.
This, even as they are accused of abandoning the very public school system that for decades minorities who fought to overcome separate and unequal education have been told is the ticket up and out of oppression.
``Many of them have recognized that academically the public school system has not saved them,'' said Brian Ray, president of the National Home Education Research Institute, a nonprofit based in Oregon.
While there are no concrete figures, anecdotally, experts say there is a growing diversity in homeschooling.
Single parents are venturing into it, and it is proving to be a sanctuary for many interracial couples.
In the past, homeschooling has been a choice made mostly by white, middle-income families who could afford setting themselves apart from the traditional educational system.
``Homeschooling has now become so prevalent that it has gotten to the point where it is not seen as wacky or nutty,'' Ray said.
``So it makes it easier for minorities to try it''.
He estimates that there about 1.3 to 1.7 million K-12 homeschooled children nationwide, about 1 percent of those black and a lesser percentage Hispanic.
``I think over the next five years, you're going to see real growth,'' he said.
The rapid expansion and growth in use of the Internet also has meant plenty of inexpensive resources for homeschoolers, easing some socioeconomic barriers.
A book written in 1996, ``Freedom Challenge: African American Homeschoolers,'' even features essays by 15 families that serve as a road map.
The interest in homeschooling is growing so much that Joyce and Eric Burges of Baker, La.
, are creating a national networking group that encourages African-Americans to homeschool.
``My husband and I want to put a beacon of light out there that says this is an option, this is a choice you have,'' said Joyce Burges, an executive secretary who homeschools three children.
Missy and Rick Parker, who have been homeschooling for 16 years, created a similar group in 1994 in Detroit.
``It's a matter of commitment,'' said Missy Parker, a Southern Baptist who homeschools to teach religious values.
She estimates that at least 200 African-American families in Detroit are homeschooling.
``Most African-Americans wouldn't venture to do it because they didn't feel they were equipped.
But, that's what the support group is for, so you don't have to do it on your own''.
Homeschooling, however, doesn't come without challenges or criticisms as any family, black or white, knows.
These include fear of the unknown, lack of support from relatives and friends, financial belt-tightening and questions about the legitimacy of homeschooling.
And for African-Americans the accusation of black flight.
``Anything that we take away from the public schools, especially in the cities has a detrimental effect,'' said Steven C.
Leonard, headmaster of the Jeremiah E.
Burke High School in Dorchester.
``I would much rather have minority parents, black parents, all parents, fight to strengthen the public shcool systems because like it or not that's where the bulk of the students who compose our future will be educated''.
Other African-American educators believe students lose something when parents chose to school at home.
``One of the great benefits of public schooling is that we teach people, children how to both ask for help from others as well as to give help to others who need it,'' said Charles Willie, a Harvard professor emeritus and one of the designers of Boston public school's controlled-choice assignment plan.
``These are valuable learnings that are difficult to replace in an isolated learning environment'' Still, minorities are choosing to homeschool for reasons as diverse as the ways in which they are teaching their children.
Some, like the Shaws, say the public school system is failing African-American children, who often end up at the bottom of achievement assessments.
Results by race on the 1999 Massachusetts Comprehensive Assessment System showed black and Latino students behind whites in every category for every grade.
In contrast, the Shaws point to a 1997 study by Ray and the Home School Legal Defense Association showing less of a disparity between achievement rates in math and reading among minority and white homeschoolers.
In addition, lamenting the loss of close-knit black communities, some parents say homeschooling allows them to fortify their children in nuturing environments.
``This early stage is critical to establishing what is important, what we believe in,'' said Alan Shaw, a computer consultant who works from home.
Some, like Kevin Brooks, a divorced father in Arlington, say they are homeschooling to compensate for school systems that allow too many children to fall through the cracks.
Brooks, a researcher for Motorola, pulled his 14-year-old son Kristoff out of public school in February when he found he was spending hours trying to help his son through course work the youth should have already mastered.
This year, Brooks also plans to homeschool Kristoff's twin sister.
He uses a network of friends, black and white, to help teach Kristoff.
``One of my challenges, and it will increase, is feeling comfortable having someone who isn't black talk to my kids about issues of race one-on-one,'' said Brooks, who shares custody with his formerwife.
During a recent homeschooling session, one of Brook's white friends and Kristoff had a complex conversation on how black people are sometimes portrayed negatively in cartoons.
It taught Brooks a lesson: ``When you are learning from the world, outside the classroom system, you are exposed to more things,'' he said.
``So talking about stuff is a lot more important now''.
From the moment that Beverley Foreman, a Jamaica native, set foot in this country in 1976, she had trouble with traditional schools.
It started with her youngest son, who at 5 was already at a second-grade level, able to read and write in cursive.
Here, he was placed in kindergarten and put in a corner to play with blocks, she said.
``He became so distracted and disinterested in school,'' she said, and watched as he was bused out of his community to a school with special needs students, and told her son might have attention deficit disorder.
He eventually graduated high school, but after that Foreman pulled her other children out of public schools.
The Maynard mother of four boys was ``terrified'' when she began homeschooling seven years ago, but she got over her fear and is still homeschooling her youngest son using libraries and museums as classrooms.
The teachable moments, insist the families, proves it is worth it over and over again.
The Shaws, for example, were there when one son assumed God was white.
They told him God has no color but people generally project on Him an image with which they identify.
And while it was their parents' choice, some minority homeschool children also applaud the move.
Candace Burges, 15, values the one-on-one attention.
``If I were in school now, the average teacher has to teach about 30 kids in one classroom.
With my mom, it's only three,'' she said.
And self-esteem, Burges said, is nurtured at home.
``Sometimes African-American students are underestimated in school and they are teased and people really don't know who they really are,'' she said.
Alan Shaw, who attended public schools, says he never envisioned homeschooling his children.
But, back in college he was one to go against the grain, he said.
``I've always been hoping there would be some alternative to mainstream life,'' Shaw said.
He found it at home.
PURCELLVILLE, Va.
_ The dormitories are still under construction in the hilly fields, but Patrick Henry College already has a few rules: Students will wear uniforms.
They won't drink.
They won't date, unless their parents ``are informed of the potential romance'' and approve.
All of which will set the college apart when it opens next fall.
Yet what is drawing national attention to the school is not its strict code of conduct, but its future student body.
Almost every undergraduate entering Patrick Henry College will have been home-schooled.
That makes them graduates of one of the most controversial movements in American education, one that gained steam in the 1980s amid a series of legal battles pitting parents against the government.
Now that the first wave of the country's 1.5 million home-schooled children is reaching college age, there is a new debate: When, and how, should they be thrust into the ``real world''?
Critics of home-schooling have long argued children need exposure to the outside world and peers to grow into well-rounded adults.
And home-schoolers freely admit their aim is to ``let children be children'' by sheltering them from the harsh realities and temptations of the modern world.
But when do children stop being children?
How do they make that transition?
And what kind of adult lives will home-schooled children be prepared to lead?
Officials at Patrick Henry College, believed to be the first ever to target home-schoolers, think they have found an answer in their curriculum: The only major for incoming freshmen will be government.
In addition to their classes, students will write legislative papers for US congressmen, which they hope will then be used as actual guides for congressional staffers.
Students will also participate in Capitol Hill ``apprenticeships,'' all to train them for a future in the most unsheltered of careers: politics.
``If the real world means Capitol Hill, they'll be as prepared as anyone,'' said the school's founder, Michael P.
Farris, who has home-schooled his 10 children, the oldest of whom is 24.
``If it is defined as the college bar scene?
No, they're not going to be prepared for that a bit.
It would be fair to say we're skipping one phase of wildness.
We're skipping them straight into adulthood''.
This intertwining of politics and home-schooled students is bound to draw notice, especially since the home-schooling movement is so often depicted as antigovernment.
In the last 19 years advocates for home schooling have filed hundreds of lawsuits in more than 40 states, according to the Home School Legal Defense Association.
The purpose of the litigation, in most cases, has been to get government out of citizens' educational lives.
But to Farris and his colleagues, the vision is entirely consistent.
Patrick Henry College will be a breeding ground for the next generation of crusaders _ who may abstain from partying with the rest of the world, but will still work to change it.
The school's promotional material states the goal: ``Eventually, these highly-qualified public servants will themselves begin to run for elective office and will have the opportunity to lead our nation back to its constitutional roots''.
Those roots do not exclude religion, in Farris's view, and fundamentalist Christianity is clearly at the core of what the college hopes to stand for.
Students will attend daily chapel.
They must ``show evidence of a personal relationship with Jesus Christ,'' the school pamphlet says, and must subscribe to a seven-point statement of faith that includes believing in the literal resurrection of Christ.
Emblazoned on the blue-and-white folders being distributed to prospective students is a school motto: ``For Christ &AMP; For Liberty''.
Farris's vision for student relationships is also closely tied to faith.
He hopes to develop a ``practice of courtship,'' in which students ``engage in the activity of seriously looking for God's partner in life''.
Students who find themselves attracted to one another will be required to call their parents to discuss it.
The role of parents, Farris said, is ``to help them make a wise choice of whether they will marry''.
Campus life is still just a dream, of course.
The main hall is little more than a steel frame in the middle of a muddy field, surrounded by cranes and construction material.
The administrators, including Farris, work out of a cluster of townhouses in a subdivision of this tiny town in western Loudon County, whose other inhabitants include a Dunkin' Donuts and a McDonald's along a two-lane main road.
But, if all goes well, the state higher education council of Virginia will recommend Patrick Henry be approved to enroll students, a final step toward opening its doors in 2000.
Farris said he hopes to send out applications as early as this week.
And he is in the midst of fund-raising to help pay the school's $50 million in long-term costs; since June, he said he has raised close to $1.5 million.
Among those who have helped is the Republican Governor of Virginia, Jim Gilmore, who signed copies of a Patrick Henry biography at a party to raise funds, Farris said.
There are other political connections, too: Janet Ashcroft, the wife of Republican Senator John Ashcroft of Missouri, is on the school's board of trustees.
And Farris considers Representative Steve Largent, an influential Republican from Oklahoma, a ``good friend''.
Those political ties will become increasingly important if the apprenticeship system is put into practice, as some of the 100 to 140 students begin to write legislative papers for congressmen.
But there are those who wonder whether integrating home-schooled, and to some degree ``home-colleged'', students into the political culture of Capitol Hill will be as easy or productive as Farris makes it sound.
``Their experience is of being cut off, to a large extent, from people with different values and different backgrounds,'' said Mark Rozell, a professor of politics at Catholic University.
``Once anyone goes into politics, to be successful it's necessary to know how to converse with different people and to know how to work effectively with them''.
But to Brad Jacob, the school's provost, that is exactly why schools like Patrick Henry are in demand.
``We see this college as a transition from the home, and from a home school, into the real world of living on your own,'' he said.
``We don't think it's necessary to make that transition by dumping an 18-year-old cold turkey on a college campus.
We're trying to make that transition in a controlled way.''
BOSTON _ In a major victory for home schoolers that also serves as a warning to school districts statewide, Massachusetts' highest court Wednesday ruled that Lynn school officials have no right to visit parent's homes to see how they teach their children.
Capping a seven-year lawsuit over parents' rights to teach children any way they choose, the ruling comes at a critical time for home schoolers: As their numbers have quadrupled in the last decade to an estimated 4,500 statewide, hundreds of families are struggling to understand their rights in vaguely written laws and court rulings.
Lynn will not appeal the decision and the new school superintendent said Wednesday the district had already begun to revamp the policy before the Supreme Judicial Court ruled.
``Still, this ruling definitely clears the air for school districts,'' said Lynn superintendent James Mazareas, who took office in August.
The district originally pursued the case because ``Six or seven years ago this was uncharted territory,'' he said.
The case stretches back to 1991, when Stephen and Lois Pustell filed a suit against the Lynn School Committee because the board required home schoolers to be periodically observed by school officials.
In 1994, Michael and Virginia Brunelle faced criminal charges in the same city when they objected to home visits and refused to submit their educational plans to Lynn officials.
While the criminal charges were dropped, the Brunelles, Pustells and their attorneys challenged the validity of Lynn's policy first in the federal courts and then in the state courts during the past three years.
Meanwhile, both couples, each with five children, continued teaching their children at home rather than sending them to school.
``We're just thrilled with the decision,'' said Stephen Pustell, 44, a computer analyst, Wednesday.
The city's job ``is to know that children are being educated, not to educate them''.
The court did not rule on the constitutionality of visiting home schoolers and instead relied on a much simplier argument: there is no state law that says school districts can require home visits.
The court also re-emphasized parents' long-standing rights to educate their children in the best way they see fit.
``It's a big victory with national significance,'' said Michael Farris, a lawyer from the Virginia-based Home School Legal Defense Association, who represented the parents.
``Home school laws are in constant flux.
If this decision would have gone the other way, we think there would have been copycat school districts all over the country''.
While Lynn is considered the only school district in the country to have required home visits, some school districts statewide have had the requirement on their books, but did not enforce it.
Some districts that did not have the requirement would ask parents for home visits.
Many times parents, unsure of their rights, agreed to allow inspectors into their homes.
``This ruling will help clarify things,'' said Pat Farenga, president of Holt Associates, publisher of a magazine about home schooling.
``There are a lot of people who don't want to report they home school because of the vagueness'' of regulations.
State law does allow local boards to monitor home schooling.
Most school systems require some type of documentation _ portfolios of student work, assurances that students are being taught the full school year, or proof of lesson plans.
Wednesday, some school districts said they welcomed the SJC decision to give them guidance.
``The law is very vague.
..it's been difficult,'' said Lois Sullivan of the Cambridge Public Schools.
While home visits can be part of an agreement between a home schooler and the district, it is never required, she said, adding, ``This will help us''.
While flatly rejecting the inclusion of home visits as a mandatory right of school board's oversight, the SJC left the door open for home visits in cases where a child may be failing educationally, or if other families send their children to a neighbor for schooling.
But the SJC said there was no valid reason to consider home visits essential today to meet the state goal of ensuring all children are being properly educated.
``Teaching methods may be less formalized, but in the home setting may be more effective,'' Greaney wrote.
While not directly endorsing the home schooling movement, the court said officials need to trust that parents who choose home school over public school are capable of educating their children _ although it many be in a different way than a public school.
``We doubt that parents like the (Brunelles and Pustells), who are so committed to home education that they are willing to forgo the public schools, and devote substantial time and energy to their children, will let the children's progress suffer for lack of adequate instructional space,'' he wrote .
WASHINGTON _ Gov.
George W.
Bush of Texas faced an audience of more than 1,600 home schoolers Friday, offering encouragement but stopping short of supporting tax credits or vouchers for parents who choose to bypass public schools.
``In Texas, we think home schooling is something to respected and something to be protected,'' the Republican presidential front-runner told the first national meeting of the Virginia-based Home School Legal Defense Association.
``Respecting the energy and commitment of loving mothers and loving fathers.
Protecting them from the interference of government''.
That line got rousing applause from the audience, many of whose members are fearful that any government help might come with strings, such as testing and curriculum requirements.
The association supports tax credits, but not vouchers, said Michael Smith, the group's vice-president.
The best thing Bush could say about home schooling is ``nothing,'' said Bob Mann, 42, of New Jersey, who home-schools his five children.
``The state of New Jersey has no laws regarding home schooling, and I would like to keep it that way,'' he said.
Bush's home schooling message met with applause Friday, but he has departed from conservatives on key education points.
Earlier this month, he proposed a limited program of vouchers _ giving parents tax money for educational choices other than public schools _ that some Republicans said doesn't go far enough.
And he has proposed placing the federal Head Start program under the U.S.
Department of Education, expanding a federal agency that is anathema to many conservatives.
On Friday, Bush delivered a variation of his stump speech designed neither to alienate nor appease an audience unsure about whether his ``compassionate conservative'' message is conservative enough for them.
``This is a group of people who have rejected the educational system as it is,'' an unconvinced Mann said afterwards.
``All he did was uphold ideals of government sponsored education.
... He's trying to be all things to all people.
`` Jena Heath can be reached at jenah(at)coxnews.com ENDIT Story Filed By Cox Newspapers For Use By Clients of the New York Times News Service
They are pioneers, in a way: the first wave of the modern home-schooling movement, the first generation of children to be taught primarily by their parents.
Some 15 years after states began legalizing home schooling in earnest, these early graduates are starting to make their way in the world.
Some have found the transition challenging, especially when trying to convince colleges and employers that home school is as good as high school, or when trying to get used to working in groups and socializing with peers.
Others have had easy success, building on talents nurtured in their home incubators and drawing on a sense of competence fed by their teacher-parents' undivided support.
The experiences of these young adults have paved the way for the increasing numbers of children coming after them.
Following years of court battles, home schooling is now legal in every state.
While there are no exact figures, estimates suggest that the number of home-schooled children has jumped to anywhere between 500,000 and 1.5 million today, from 15,000 in 1970.
Many, if not most, go to college, and schools like Harvard and Yale now have policies for evaluating their work.
The Internet has vastly broadened the range of home curriculums.
Still, many mainstream educators remain wary _ about socialization skills and about the potential inability of parents to give their children the rigor and depth they need in all subjects.
There are two major trends in home schooling: one philosophy is rooted in religious objections to the secularization of schools and to teaching subjects like evolution; the other, the more free-form philosophy called unschooling, initially embraced by families who considered themselves part of the counterculture, encourages independent expression and exposure to a broad menu of experiences.
Increasingly, home schooling is appealing to more conventional families, too _ parents who worry that their children are not getting enough individual attention in school and are either excelling faster than their classmates or need more help in certain skills.
Today home schooling can involve strong links to local schools: consultations with teachers, playing on school sports teams, even attending a class or two.
Many states now require standardized tests or portfolios of work for evaluation by state authorities or certified teachers, mainstream benchmarks that were up to parents to accept or reject in the earlier years of modern home schooling.
Still, some families have almost no dealings with schools and view grading systems as inadequate or irrelevant to real learning.
Other parents take care to immerse their children in extracurricular programs so they will meet children their own age.
Still others encourage individual activities, including internships and volunteer work, which help make their children comfortable with adults, but not always at ease with their peers.
All of these decisions shape the way home-schoolers adjust to the larger world.
&UR; Big Achievements, High Expectations &LR; Other kids always asked Tad Heuer why he wasn't in school and if he spent his days watching television.
Sometimes in his hometown, Holliston, Mass.
, west of Boston, he'd get stopped by a police officer who would ``try to get me for truancy,'' he said.
But Heuer, now a 20-year-old senior at Brown University, loved being able to study American history and music without having to switch subjects every 50 minutes.
He also loved going on a monthlong tour of Civil War battlefields and coal mines.
``I'm sure there were points when I was just miserable and said, `How could my parents do this to me'?
'' he said, ``but I don't think there was ever a time that I wanted to be in school''.
Like an increasing number of contemporary home-schoolers, Heuer had an education that was constantly intertwined with the conventional school system.
His mother, a former elementary school teacher who thought she could do better than the schools, made sure he and his younger brother took the Iowa Test of Basic Skills and enlisted certified teachers to review her sons' work.
Heuer took science classes at the high school, partly because, he said, ``it's not easy to buy one frog in formaldehyde'' for home study.
In 11th grade, he took an English class.
He had violin lessons at the school, played on the basketball team and worked on the school newspaper.
These activities connected him with children his age and with what they were learning.
At the same time, he had to work hard to be accepted by the world of mainstream education.
When he decided that he wanted the ``credential'' of a high school diploma, the Superintendent of Schools and the school committee were reluctant, suggesting he take a year of college first or seek a high school equivalency.
``There was a lot of inherent mistrust of someone who's been home schooled _ `How do you know you did the same thing everybody else did'?
'' Heuer said.
He persisted: he deserved a diploma because of his strong links to the school and community, he said, and the officials gave in.
He had less trouble being embraced by the working world.
At 15, he spent a summer working for a Democratic Massachusetts State Representative, Barbara Gardner, after she wrote him a letter praising an article on term limits he'd written for a local newspaper.
Ms. Gardner said he seemed more well-rounded and mature than others his age.
At 16, he worked for the unsuccessful gubernatorial campaign of Mark Roosevelt, a Democrat, impressing the staff so much that he was promoted from making copies to doing research on the opposition.
``My guess would be home-schoolers would give you pause if they seemed to be a person of average talent,'' said Michael Gritton, Roosevelt's former communications director, now policy director for a nonpartisan think tank, the Massachusetts Institute for a New Commonwealth, where Heuer also worked after the Roosevelt campaign.
``You'd be thinking, `Who is this person?
What have they done?
What do they know'?
You'd think to yourself, `Are they, like, coming out of a cult or something'?
But he's so talented, you think, `Well, geez, maybe this home-schooling thing is something to consider'.
'' With a combined SAT score of 1290 (the national average is 1017), Heuer applied to nine colleges, improvising a 55-page application that detailed the work he had done and included exhibits _ a science paper on Canada geese, a tape of his viola playing.
The transcript his parents created was 30 pages.
Heuer was rejected by Harvard and Yale but accepted by Johns Hopkins, American University, Catholic University and Brown, where he is pursuing a bachelor's degree in public policy and a master's in political science.
Last spring he won a $30,000 Harry S.
Truman Scholarship, one of 105 such awards given annually nationwide.
nn Heuer felt comfortable at college immediately, introducing himself at orientation.
``No reason I was going to be any different than anyone else,'' he said.
His home-schooling background has made him interested in a career involving education policy, trying to ``transfer the schooling I got into the public schools,'' he said.
But he's not sure he'll end up home schooling his own children.
``If I could save the world and home school my kids at the same time,'' he said, ``no question I would home school my kids''.
But, he added, ``Am I going to please everyone who's expecting me to go off and do great things, be a high-powered lawyer or whatever?
It's weighing the advantages that we've received from home schooling, and do we put that back into home schooling''?
&UR; Now, a Drink or Two - and Evolution &LR; When Julie Vickery's parents pulled her out of school in the sixth grade, she was in shock.
``I thought that was something they did in the 1800s,'' she said.
Ms. Vickery grew up in Central, S.C., near Greenville, and had been one of the better students in her elementary school.
She was convinced that she was going to be a failure because she wasn't going to regular classes.
Her parents, she explained, decided on home schooling primarily for religious reasons.
``My parents were quite fundamentalist in their approach to life,'' said Ms.
Vickery, now 23.
``They thought the public schools would brainwash the kids, not teach them how to read and write, but teach them all this horrible liberal thought.
They were concerned about creationism versus evolutionism and the move away from the phonics approach to reading''.
Religious home schooling tends to be structured more like a classroom setting, with the mother serving as teacher and using religious materials to supplement more standard academic lessons.
Ms. Vickery's mother, a homemaker, tried that approach.
``After two weeks,'' Ms.
Vickery recalled, ``I said, `Mom, you don't know anything.
Let me do it'.
'' With that, Ms.
Vickery was allowed to choose her own textbooks _ ones that approached history, science and art from a biblical perspective _ and she became an indefatigable learner.
``We had a core curriculum based on scriptural principles,'' said Norma Vickery, Julie's mother.
``At the same time that we were doing the academic study, we were also incorporating the biblical principles that went with them''.
At first, Ms.
Vickery's social world turned upside down.
``My three or four best friends all told me, `My mommy and daddy don't want me playing with you anymore,''' she said.
```They say your parents are really strict'''.
That hurt.
But Ms.
Vickery, who had also been teased at school because she was a brainy, nonathletic child, said she soon had an experience common to many home- schoolers: she began making friends outside her age group.
She asked the Clemson University professors who lived in her neighborhood about geology or history.
She played piano at a nursing home.
``Instead of missing out on socialization,'' Mrs.
Vickery said, ``we probably were more selective in the kind of socialization she was getting.
Sometimes in the school situation, they can socialize with the wrong kind of people, people with entirely different values or no values, or just troublemakers and that sort of thing''.
To broaden her experiences, her father took her on a ride with a truck driver, on a tour of an automobile factory and to see how a newspaper worked.
Going to the grocery store became a lesson in math.
By the time Ms.
Vickery was 14, she had ``finished every high school course that was recognized by the state of South Carolina,'' she said, and had taken the SAT's and scored a combined 1390.
She spent the next two years researching and writing papers, mining the libraries of five nearby universities.
At 17, Ms.
Vickery and her parents decided she would go to college.
``You're not going to gain acceptance in the world if you don't have the credential,'' she said.
She chose Northland Baptist Bible College, a small, religious school in Dunbar, Wis.
``I think if I had gone to a larger setting,'' Ms.
Vickery said, ``I would have had more of a problem getting adjusted''.
In general, she felt more comfortable socializing with the staff than the students.
The hardest part was learning to ``work as part of a team,'' she said.
``That was very difficult for me''.
In one course, for example, Ms.
Vickery, who was majoring in education, had to collaborate with other education students to determine the best way to tutor a child.
``One person wanted to complete the textbook,'' she said.
``One person wanted something else; not all of those ideas could work.
At the beginning I was hesitant to express my ideas to others.
I thought, `I haven't been through the system; they have.
I don't know how students are supposed to learn, I just know how I learned'.
'' Things improved as she became more comfortable.
But she was still hesitant to talk about her home-schooling experience.
Her faculty adviser did not find out until her sophomore year and, she said, ``He just about choked.
He said, `You couldn't have been home schooled, you can read and write'.
'' After graduation, Ms.
Vickery went to Korea to teach at a private language institute affiliated with a church.
Told she would be teaching English-speaking high school and college students, she was disappointed to find that her students were Korean-speaking preschoolers.
At the end of the year, she returned to this country and formed a group called Teachers for Christ International, a religiously based educational organization geared toward giving young teachers more control over their educational careers overseas.
She plans to return to Korea but is spending this year getting a master's degree in education at Bob Jones University, a conservative Christian institution in Greenville, S.C., that emphasizes religion.
She believes that her home-schooling background can help her teach effectively because she can see classroom problems from an ``outsider's perspective''.
But now she wants to learn the insider's ropes, too.
Ms. Vickery said she is not as conservative as her parents.
She allows herself to wear pants in public, for example.
She also allows herself an occasional drink or two.
And while she does not believe in evolution, she would teach the theory as part of a science class.
These days, she has a group of friends her age and goes on casual dates.
She does not unequivocally recommend home schooling.
She has seen other home-schooled children who, at 10, cannot read and spend their days running around outside, saying they are looking for bugs for a science lesson.
``There are some kids who are so social, they thrive on team sports,'' she said.
``You lose that if home schooled''. nn
After bouncing in and out of so many schools in Europe, Africa and the United States that he can't remember all their names, Simone Liverani found himself in Kolokani, a town in Mali, the west African country where his mother worked for a company drilling water wells.
There was no diplomatic or international school anywhere nearby, so he tried a local high school.
Liverani, an Italian who also speaks English and understands some French, had been told classes would be taught in French, but most teachers spoke Bambara, the native language.
``This was the last straw,'' he said.
``It was a mess''.
An official at the United States consulate suggested the Independent Study High School, based at the University of Nebraska in Lincoln.
Founded in 1929 as a correspondence program to educate rural Nebraskans, the school has one of only a few fully accredited distance-education programs offering high school diplomas; other well-known programs include the North Dakota Division of Independent Study in Fargo and Texas Tech University Distance Learning in Lubbock.
They offer an option for the children of diplomats and missionaries, or those who can't or don't want to go to a schoolhouse every day.
Among young athletes and actors who have studied through Nebraska are Michelle Kwan, the Olympic silver medalist, and Lisa Bonet, a star of ``The Cosby Show''.
While most students take courses to fill gaps in their school records, some 3,400 students have received diplomas from Nebraska since 1968.
With the emergence of home schooling as a viable choice for teen-agers, enrollment has increased almost 50 percent in the last decade, according to James Schiefelbein, the Nebraska school's principal.
Today there are some 5,000 students at any given time, representing more than 130 countries.
Joining the new wave in distance education, the school has begun offering on-line courses and is developing a complete on-line, four-year curriculum with the help of a $15 million grant from the federal Department of Education.
For now, students must take a mix of Web and correspondence courses to meet diploma requirements, which are 40 courses, or 200 course hours.
A course can be completed in as little as five weeks of intensive study, or stretched out for as long as a year.
Assignments are submitted by mail, fax or e-mail to 9 permanent teachers, who grade them with help from 10 to 15 part-timers.
When written examinations are required, a proctor approved by the school administers the tests.
``Our kids do very, very well post- secondary,'' Schiefelbein said.
``They are not dependent on somebody to tell them what to do and when, so they have a little bit of an advantage on their peers because they have become more self-disciplined workers''.
The school designed a program for Liverani, now 28, that allowed him to finish his diploma requirements in a year and a half.
From his remote home, he sent assignments by mail, and they were graded and returned that way.
``They managed to make you feel that you were part of a school,'' said Liverani, who worked this past summer in New York City as an intern at The Economist and is hoping for a journalism job in Europe.
``I sent in a lot of material, and it would be corrected.
They would write a lot.
That was important because it was a continuous relationship''.
Allison Rizzuto, of Omaha, an Independent Study graduate, remembers getting a big box of experiments in the mail for physical science class.
``It's kind of funny, because you are in the kitchen with a bunsen burner and you have to do all these experiments by yourself,'' she said.
Ms. Rizzuto, worried that attending a traditional school until 3 p.m. would derail her career, had convinced her parents to let her take correspondence courses so she could sing in a folk-pop group with her three older sisters.
She studied from 8 a.m. to noon for four years, spending afternoons practicing or touring the county and state fair circuit.
In May her group, Mulberry Lane, named for the street the sisters grew up on, released a debut CD, ``Don't Cry _ Til You Get to the Car,'' which they recorded themselves in their home studio.
``I learned to be self-motivated,'' said Ms.
Rizzuto, now 22.
``In correspondence school, every textbook you get, you have to finish the whole thing.
You read every page of the book''. &QL;
While the teacher settled his class down for a discussion of ``The Iliad,'' a 14-year-old student, Magnus Elhardt, chuckled at a classmate's wisecrack.
The moment was typical of a high school literature class, except the teacher was 150 miles away, the classmate was 3,000 miles away, and Magnus, a home-schooled student in Thousand Oaks, Calif.
, was sitting in front of a computer in his family's kitchen.
His mother, Maria, was ironing a shirt a few feet away.
The lesson, transmitted via computer speakers and computer screen, had the give-and-take of a classroom, complete with student banter and teacher scolding.
But on this particular morning, the teacher, Fritz Hinrichs, was giving a lecture that was dogged by audio bugs _ stutters, reverberations and interruptions.
At times, the class was reminiscent of the Apollo 13 mission, with Houston frantically trying to reach an errant spacecraft.
The technology may be rough, but educational experiments like Hinrichs' are becoming increasingly common among home schoolers.
Since the 1980s, home schooling has largely been viewed as an option for religious fundamentalists and ``Whole Earth Catalog'' types, but there may be a shift in the reasons people choose that approach.
In the 1990s, the number of home schoolers has tripled, and many participating families say they see home schooling as an alternative to mediocre public schools and expensive private schools.
Although it is difficult to categorize those participating in home schooling, Patricia Lines, a researcher at the federal Department of Education, said that in Florida, considered a bellwether state, a survey of home schoolers revealed a shift in recent years in the reasons for choosing home schooling: dissatisfaction with public and private schools was listed first most often, moving ahead of religious reasons.
``It doesn't mean they're secular home schoolers, but their primary motivation has shifted,'' Lines said.
Home-schooled children now number one million, according to Lines, or 1.6 million, according to Dr.
Brian Ray, a researcher at the National Home Education Research Institute, a home-schooling advocacy and research organization based in Oregon.
(The estimates are based on different sources _ it is difficult to track the home-schooling population because reporting rules and mandatory school requirements vary by state).
Technology is playing a role in the popularity of home schooling by providing a support system for novices and helping to blur the line between school-based and home-based education.
Home schoolers, as a group, own computers at a higher rate than other American families.
As of 1996, as many as 86 percent of home schoolers had computers and almost as many were using them to teach their children, according to a study by Ray.
By contrast, computer ownership was less common among the general population of families with children.
Twenty-four percent of single-mother households and 58 percent of married-couple households with children owned computers, according to 1997 figures from the United States Department of Commerce.
Computers can give home-schooling parents expert support for college-preparatory and elective courses for children of high school age, and a large number of children taught at home in the 1980s have now reached adolescence.
Home-schooling sites on the Web range from online academies to support groups for home-schooling parents.
There are virtual trading posts where home schoolers barter for used books or supplies, and Web pages catering to special interest groups, like self-described pagan home schoolers and home schoolers in military families.
The emerging role of the Internet in home schooling has cracked open the door to more collaboration between home schoolers and schools and led to more interest in home-based learning.
In regions where home schooling is so popular that it threatens the financial health of public school districts, some school leaders have used computers to lure home schoolers partway back to the fold.
In 1997, an Alaska school district seeking to raise funds to build a public boarding school developed a program that offered home schoolers the use of new computers (for a $200 refundable deposit), free curriculum supplies and support from an expert teacher if they would enroll in the district.
The families kept home schooling, but their enrollment allowed the district to qualify for more state aid.
The program attracted 2,000 applicants, far exceeding district estimates, and the extra state money helped pay for the new school.
Similar programs are in place in Washington State.
Some public school districts and charter schools are going a step further, offering their curriculums on line.
Usually such services are free for home schoolers who pay local taxes; others must pay tuition.
One of the pioneering online districts, the Federal Way School District in Washington State, began offering its Internet Academy (169.204.208.10/Ia/newlook.htm) to home schoolers three years ago.
In its second year, only 2 of the 250 families enrolled dropped out because of technical problems.
The academy's principal, Linda McInturff, attributes the program's success both to its strong technical assistance, both on line and by phone, and to the home schoolers' willingness to help one another.
nn ``I have found them adopting each other,'' Ms.
McInturff said.
``They are so excited about getting our curriculum that they're willing to go the extra mile''.
Janie Levine Hellyer, a home schooler in Olympia, Wash.
, said on her four-year-old online support network, the Family Learning Exchange (www.flexonline.org): ``Home school parents, by design, are motivated, Home schoolers aren't afraid to ask questions''.
There is disagreement among home-schooling leaders about whether the cyberwave is a major, positive trend or a minor, negative one.
Among those who see technology in home schooling in a rosy light are Mary Pride, publisher of Practical Homeschooling, a bimonthly magazine published in Fenton, Mo.
, and Michael Farris, president of the Home School Legal Defense Association, a lobbying group based in Purcellville, Va.
They characterize technology as a tool that makes it possible to offer advanced classes to the growing number of home schoolers of high school age and as a way to draw school-based students to home schooling.
They predict extensive growth in the number of home schoolers using technology for direct instruction.
``I believe what we're seeing today is not even the tip of the iceberg _ it's the glistening of the water underneath the iceberg,'' said Farris, who offers a yearlong constitutional law class on line.
Home-schooling traditionalists, both religious and secular, express concern about the trend toward high-tech schooling.
The skeptics include Susannah Sheffer, editor of Growing Without Schooling, a 21-year-old bimonthly magazine, and Matt Hern, a writer and home-schooling advocate.
They see technology as, at best, a minor tool that merely encourages the social networking that home schoolers have done all along and, at worst, as an unhealthy replacement for face-to-face community building.
``The point is not to slip into some kind of Luddite freak-out but to realize that technology always replaces something,'' Hern said.
``As a culture, we have an inability to limit our access to technology and our use of tools like the TV and the car.
To say that to be a good home learner you've got to have a $5,000 Pentium computer in the living room is confirming the elitist perception of home schoolers''.
&QL; Technology enthusiasts like Mrs.
Pride, the publisher, counter that the anti-computer home schoolers _ particularly those affiliated with the so-called unschooling movement, which rejects most packaged educational programs in favor of more free-form learning activities guided by children's interests _ are the elitists.
``I think unschoolers sometimes exaggerate the benefits of doing everything yourself,'' she said.
``There is a reason I don't pump my own water and build my own well and make my own electricity and grind my own wheat.
Yes, I could be doing these things, but if the objective is to have kids with characters and have a good education, there are many routes to reach it.
I feel to limit yourself and say, I have to do it all myself, is a mistake.
The outsiders _ they are used to delegating things to other people.
It's this group we're discussing''.
Mrs. Pride holds degrees in electrical engineering and computer systems engineering and was author of one of the first books providing extensive software reviews for home schoolers in the early 1990s, ``Pride's Guide to Educational Software'' (Crossway Books, $25).
Mrs. Pride has 10 computers in her home, three telephone lines connectible to the Internet, and five children enrolled in online courses.
She has experienced the headaches and joys of using technology for home-based learning.
``My 11-year-old is always downloading some dumb game that I always have to delete,'' she said, but the computers have been an unqualified godsend for her 18-year-old son, Theodore.
He was born with fibromuscular disproportion, a condition that led to uneven muscle development.
Four years ago, he suffered a life-threatening bout of pneumonia and endured a series of painful operations for scoliosis.
Today he lives with three steel rods attached to his spine and one-third normal lung capacity.
During his recuperation, his home-schooling curriculum increasingly focused on the computer, and he was a tester for several online learning academies.
He still requires breathing assistance at night, but he has nearly completed school and has started two Web-based businesses, one that creates Web sites and one that monitors and updates company Web sites, both of which he operates from two computers in his bedroom.
``Learning at home without computers would be much more difficult and much less interesting,'' he said.
``A hundred years ago, he would have died,'' Mrs.
Pride said.
``Fifty years ago, he wouldn't have been able to finish his own education or have a job''.
Mrs. Pride is convinced that the home-schooling movement will grow because technology increases the comfort level of ``outsiders'' to the prospect of teaching their own children.
Even die-hard home schoolers like Maria Elhardt and her son Magnus can see the advantages to getting some help.
Neither felt up to the task of tackling Homer on their own.
The weekly online sessions with Hinrichs might have static, but they provide a solid structure for some challenging reading.
&QL; nn ``I really like it because I do learn a lot and it gives me an opportunity to read these books,'' Magnus Elhardt said.
``I probably would not do it on my own because of the length''.
His mother added that Hinrichs knew more than she did about Greek poetry and could do a much better job teaching the subject.
The demand for teaching expertise inspired Janet Hale, 40, a longtime schoolteacher, to quit her job and reinvent herself as a digital tutorial entrepreneur.
The result is Willoway Cyberschool (www.willoway.com).
``A lot of people who have never home-schooled before are hesitant to start because they feel they're going to be completely responsible for their child's education,'' Mrs.
Hale said.
``Now there's teachers behind it all''.
She now operates from a nerve center in her Reading, Pa.
, home, complete with eight computers and numerous tiny eyeball videocameras so she can conduct classes via videoconferencing.
For tuition of $2,250, she works with 40 home-schooled middle-schoolers around the country as their full-time online teacher.
Her program is grounded in technology.
Students create Web pages to hand in assignments and form groups to take part in teacher-guided Web searches for social studies and science lessons.
To appeal to a broader audience, Mrs.
Hale is seeking formal accreditation for her program and planning to market it to schools seeking support for supplemental gifted programs.
Both Mrs.
Hale and Hinrichs see technology as an opportunity for teachers to tailor their work to their own needs.
``The bane of teaching is paperwork _ teachers spend all their time doing paperwork for the administration,'' said Hinrichs, 30, who founded Escondido Tutorial Service (www.gbt.org) close to five years ago.
``I get to read.
I get to really play the role of a scholar and teacher''.
Today he and a partner in Idaho electronically teach a total of 300 students through a $10,000 computer system run out of Hinrichs' home, each earning a comfortable income of more than $55,000 a year.
They teach classes at assigned times all day long using cameras and microphones, and charge students a class-by-class subscription rate.
Easy access to proven expertise and guidance is a key appeal of other online academies, too.
Wendy Pierce, 42, a home schooler in Boston, was overwhelmed by the responsibilities of teaching her eldest daughter high-school-level mathematics several years ago.
She had to compromise by reluctantly sending her teen-age daughter to junior college classes to complete her high-school education.
Today, she solves the same problem by linking her younger children to Scholars Online and Regina Coeli Academies, a pair of online educational programs offered by the Institute for Study of the Liberal Arts and Science, a nonprofit corporation.
These academies link students to expert tutors in all the basic high-school subjects.
``I would be lost trying to figure out the formulas and stuff,'' said Mrs.
Pierce, who now works for the two online academies.
The academies began in 1995 as a Compuserve discussion group for a few students by Linda Robinson, a schoolteacher in Louisiana at the time.
Today the academies attract 140 students in 33 states, Canada and South America.
Classes include live chat, e-mailed assignments, tips on Web surfing and help for parents in organizing the curriculum.
Junior-high-school classes cost $250 a year and high-school classes range from $300 to $350 a year.
The program technology is simple, like a ``schoolbus'' as Mrs.
Pierce puts it: ``It gets you there''.
The teachers work from their home computers, monitoring chat sessions, fielding homework filed by e-mail and organizing bulletin board discussions.
As much as anything else related to technology, the online tutorial is a communication form in transition.
Will the ultimate form lean toward canned lessons available through streaming video coupled with moment-to-moment recording of student performance on an online database, as Paul Allen, co-founder of Microsoft, proposes?
Or will it lean toward live lessons with video, audio and various collaborative tools, as Hinrichs' model does?
That may be one of those questions answerable only by time and technical innovation.
The potential benefits of live interaction were obvious while watching Magnus Elhardt study Homer.
The students chattered in class just as students do everywhere, only this time, their jokes about the teacher's long-winded lecture and age were typed into the chat page for everyone, including the teacher, to see.
Several times, Hinrichs had to remind students not to just type out their answers but to do the online equivalent of raising their hands _ typing an exclamation point.
There was something comforting and familiar about this interaction, and both Magnus and his mother enjoyed the interplay.
``You can tell the smart aleck in the class,'' said his mother, peeking over his head at the computer screen.
ST. LOUIS (AP) --When other kids were reading Dr.
Seuss or Winnie the Pooh, George Thampy was curled up with Noah Webster.
''He could sit with the dictionary for hours and hours, and still enjoy life,'' said his mother, Bina Thampy, laughing.
''I've never heard him in all these years say 'I'm tired,' 'I'm fed up,' 'Mommy, another day'''.
George started with the dictionary at age 6 and kept on reading it because ''I just really want to be educated''.
It paid off last week when the 12-year-old from Maryland Heights, Mo.
, won the Scripps Howard National Spelling Bee by correctly spelling ''demarche'' --a step or maneuver.
According to George's parents, the key to his victory wasn't the time he spent with the dictionary or the hours of preparation.
It was the hours he spent as a home-schooled student.
''We teach these children the art of studying,'' said K.
George Thampy, George's father.
''If I give him a new thing today, I'm confident he'll become a master of it in a very short period of time with very little help''.
Take, for example, George's second-place performance in the National Geographic Bee a week before the spelling bee.
He began preparing just four months before the finals.
George's successes, along with those of other home-schooled students in such high-profile and high-pressure events, are bringing attention to the home-schooling movement.
The top three finishers at this year's spelling bee were home-schooled, as were four of the 10 finalists in the geography bee, the most ever.
''Events like those of the last week have really helped drive home a strong message that people need not worry about our academic quality,'' said Michael Farris, president of the Home School Legal Defense Association in Purcellville, Va.
''We're going to do just fine''.
The National Home Education Research Institute estimates the number of home-schooled children somewhere between 1.3 and 1.7 million, a number that's growing by at least 7 percent a year.
The Thampys became part of those statistics while living in an area of Houston where public schools had installed metal detectors.
That wasn't the kind of school environment the two immigrants from India had pictured for their children.
They made the decision to home-school six of their seven children.
Mrs. Thampy does most of the teaching, working during the day on languages, economics, social sciences.
Thampy, a fellow in endocrinology at Washington University, works with his kids on math and science at night.
George's brother Eapen was a national finalist in the geography bee in 1997 and 1998, and sister Mallika finished sixth last year.
''We believe we can provide an all around education, an all around development of the child,'' Thampy said.
Farris cites a study that found home-schooled students scored higher than public and private school students on two widely used standardized tests.
''It's not just a few kids that really excel, but that the average home school kid is a top student also,'' Farris said.
There are critics.
The National Education Association, the nation's largest teachers' union, doesn't believe home-schooling can provide students with a comprehensive education.
But NEA spokeswoman Kathleen Lyons admits there are obvious advantages to home-schooling.
''What a great class size,'' she said.
''Every teacher in America would like that''.
George's education stresses the three Rs, as well as public speaking, personal hygiene and health.
He takes field trips with other home-schooled students to museums, farms and his dad's endocrinology lab at Washington University in St.
Louis. Sometimes he learns in a group with his siblings, but often he is taught individually and frequently he does in-depth research on subjects via the Internet.
''I have no trouble relating to kids who go to conventional schools.
They don't think I'm strange because I'm home-schooled, especially since we study the same subjects, only in a different way,'' George wrote in a letter published Wednesday in The Wall Street Journal.
His parents caution that it's not as easy as it might sound.
The couple put in long hours into teaching their children --as well as forging an extremely close, personal relationship with each of them.
''The struggle is the time,'' Thampy said.
''It is extremely expensive in the aspect of time.
You never can do all the things you want for the children.
Your work gets behind''.
----- On the Net: The National Education Association: http://www.nea.org Home School Legal Defense Association: http://www.hslda.org National Home Education Research Institute: http://www.nheri.org
America must never give up on public education.
The surest predictor of any nation's future is the priority it gives to educating its young.
Nations, like families, express their priorities in the things for which they're willing to spend their money.
Excellence in education can be expensive, Lloyd Bentsen once remarked, ``but not half as expensive as ignorance''.
One of the policy disagreements that kept Congress and the president at loggerheads for months this year was whether to budget $1.1 billion to help states hire 100,000 more classroom teachers and thus reduce the widespread overcrowding that handicaps learning.
The item was finally accepted.
But other goals, like computerizing every classroom, making sure every child reads by the third grade, and making two years of junior college as standard as a high school diploma went unfunded.
Legislators who assent without murmur to annual military budgets approaching $300 billion and multibillion-dollar highway bills seem pickier when it comes to the public schools.
Some hark back to pre-World War II days, when federal monies played practically no part in educating America's children.
States and school districts had virtually the entire responsibility.
Glaring disparities were widespread.
Massachusetts, for example, apportioned eight times as much for each of its students annually as did Mississippi.
For low- to medium-income families throughout America, the quality of educational opportunity became an accident of geography.
Then modern war taught us that the general level of learning was as essential to our national survival as the quality of our arms.
By President Lyndon B.
Johnson's administration, it became a matter of national pride to ensure the humblest American child a birthright to a first-class education.
Virtually every American profited in some way from the GI Bill of Rights that sprang from World War II.
It may have been history's most massive transfusion of money into education.
That program paid rich dividends to the nation.
The percent of America's youth finishing four years of college increased in one generation from 4.5 percent to 21.5 percent.
America boomed economically and bloomed intellectually.
As a financial investment, the GI Bill paid for itself at least 40 times over.
Because college graduates earn more, they've paid more taxes.
As a direct result of America's enhanced earning power, the coffers of the U.S.
Treasury have been enriched enormously.
And every one of us is a beneficiary of the discoveries, inventions and technologies flowing from the fountains of knowledge that bold experiment unleashed.
When the Soviets beat us into space in 1957 with Sputnik, it shocked us into the sudden realization that we'd neglected scientific studies.
Uncomfortably apprehensive at being behind, we launched our massive space effort, which ultimately overtook and surpassed that of the Soviets.
With a sense of national survival at stake, Democratic and Republican members of Congress submerged their differences and joined hands, not quarreling over credit.
The global economy now bursting upon the scene must convince us that our quality of life depends more than ever upon a high level of education, broadly shared.
A handful of geniuses won't suffice.
The widespread diffusion of knowledge and modern job skills among ordinary Americans will be our surest salvation.
Some haven't yet comprehended the truth that it matters to all of us how the rest of us are educated.
Here in Texas, some residents of affluent neighborhoods appear to resent the state law that shares a part of their property taxes with our state's impoverished school districts.
A few school boards have sought ways to circumvent that law.
Meanwhile, some critics are almost ready to give up on the public schools.
Conscientious parents, eager to have the best for their children, increasingly resort to home schooling.
Both national and state legislators, looking for an easy fix, want to abdicate the responsibility of providing excellence in public education.
They'd prefer to offer vouchers, subsidizing private schools while further draining public school systems, relegating them to second-rate status.
There's a lot to admire in parents who are willing to oversee their children's education personally on a daily basis.
Parental guidance is vital.
It takes patience and perseverance to teach one's own child, at home, all those things that an enlightened educational curriculum requires.
My hat is off to those who try.
For most Americans, however, daily home schooling would present insurmountable problems.
The vast majority of parents today couldn't manage that.
The average American family now has two bread-earners, not one.
What comforts will they sacrifice so that one can be at home all day, every day, teaching the children all the good things they'd otherwise learn in school?
Moreover, I believe that a vital part of the learning comes from the mixing.
A broad education cannot be administered in a vacuum.
For most children, the elementary grades have been our most important introduction to the wide world of other people.
And in this increasingly global environment, nobody and no nation can survive indefinitely within a protective shell.
That's why I do not rue the property taxes we pay on our residence to the Crowley school district, or resent any portion that may end up helping children in El Paso or the Rio Grande Valley.
It could tap some wellspring of undiscovered genius from whose works mankind will benefit.
What better use of money could there be?
(Jim Wright of Fort Worth, a Democrat, is a former speaker of the U.S.
House of Representatives.
You can write him at P.O.
Box 1413, Fort Worth, TX 76101.
Visit the Star-Telegram's online services on the World Wide Web: www.star-telegram.com)
WASHINGTON _ The fast-spreading home schooling movement got another boost from this year's national spelling and geography bees.
For the third year in a row, at least 5 percent of the participants in the National Spelling Bee were being educated by their parents at home, rather than in a public or private school.
``I guess cream rises to the top,'' joked Bry(cq) Conley of Newark, Calif.
, as she discussed the strong showing by her son Sean and the dozen other home schoolers among the 249 students in the spelling bee.
In the televised climax Thursday, two of the eight finalists were home-schooled.
They were Ann Foley, 13, of Marion, Ohio, who tied for sixth, and George Thampy, 11, of Maryland Heights, Mo.
, who tied for third.
Last week, five of the 55 contestants in the National Geography Bee were home schoolers, and David Beihl of Saluda, S.C., became the first home schooler to win the geography bee.
In the spelling bee, the first and only home schooler to win so far was Rebecca Sealfon of Brooklyn, N.Y., two years ago.
``The spelling and geography bees offer confirmation that home schooling can work very well indeed,'' said Michael Farris, president of the Home School Legal Defense Association in Purcellville, Va.
, which helped topple many legal barriers to home schooling.
``I think the movement's coming of age''.
The strong showing by home schoolers really beats the odds.
U.S. Department of Education studies indicate that their numbers have more than doubled in this decade, and now probably exceed 1 million.
But that is still less than 2 percent of all children of school age.
Home schooling ``is excellent for a very few parents, with very strong motivation,'' said K.
George Thampy, shortly before his son's third-place finish Thursday.
Thampy works as a biochemist and physician, and his wife Bina teaches young George, his two brothers and three sisters at their home near St.
Louis. ``Our decision to home-school our children was scripturally based,'' Thampy said.
``We wanted their education to stress character development and godly values which are not promoted in local schools''.
Conley, on the other hand, said she and her husband, Mike, a software engineer, were primarily interested in creating ``customized educations'' for Sean, 11, and his two younger brothers.
``What's cool about home schooling is that you can pick up whatever method, subjects or approaches work for your family and for your kid,'' said Conley.
She said her sons will sometimes concentrate on one to three subjects for two to three months in a row.
``Parents who try to reproduce the factory-school system _ you sit at the kitchen table and study the same courses as regular schools from 9 to 3 _ burn out after two or three years,'' Conley said.
``But that's what's great about home schooling: If you don't agree with me, you can do just that''.
``More than half of all home schooling parents are motivated by religion, usually Christian,'' said policy analyst Kevin Welner of the graduate school of education at the University of Denver, Boulder.
``But there is great diversity within that group, and among the rest of the home schoolers, both in pedagogical theory and in (ideological) orientation''.
For example, he said, some wouldn't want their children to compete in bees.
(Story can end here; Optional add follows).
For more information on the Internet: For recent research on home schooling, see dueling articles by Lawrence Rudner and by Kariane and Kevin Welner at Education Policy Analysis Archives (http://epaa.asu.edu/epaa).
Home schoolers' web pages include the Christian-oriented Home School Legal Defense Association (http://www.hslda.org), the secular National Home School Association (http://www.n-h-a.org/nha.htm), the Jewish Orthodox Bnos Henya Project (http://bnoshenya.org/), the Muslim home school magazine (http://islam.org/MHSNR/list1.html), and the Pagan Homeschool Page (http://hometown.aol.com/barbooch/index.htm).
ENDIT Story Filed By Cox Newspapers For Use By Clients of the New York Times News Service
KANSAS CITY, Mo.
_ At 13, Michael Brown pulled apart 60 computers that had been left for trash.
As part of his home-schooling, he turned them into 35 working machines.
Five years later, those computers are being used by his four brothers, a sister and home-schoolers in their Blue Springs, Mo.
, community.
There is sweet symmetry to this: The proliferation of computers is partly responsible for a boom in home schooling, a movement that's attracting more gifted children.
Access to the Internet has made home curriculums richer than ever before.
And they've also provided the parent/teachers the information they need to enter their students in local, state and national competitions.
.MDNM/And those students are winning.
Just last week, homeschooler George A.
Thampy of Missouri placed first at the Scripps Howard National Spelling Bee in Washington.
Two other home-schooled students placed second and third.
The previous week, George placed second in the National Geography Bee.
The 12-year-old from suburban St.
Louis was the second homeschooler to win the spelling bee.
In 1997 Rebecca Sealfon of Brooklyn, N.Y., won.
``As homeschoolers learn they are eligible to compete in these competitions, they begin joining in droves,'' said Michael Farris, executive director of the Center for Home School Education Legal Department.
``We started a national homeschoolers' debate program four years ago with about 150 kids.
Now there are 1,200 members''.
Twenty-seven of the 248 national spelling bee contestants this year were schooled at home.
But computers alone don't explain why more home-schooled children are appearing in major academic competitions.
Within the last five years, some educators say, major corporations that sponsor these contests have begun to accept home schooling as a legitimate, alternative form of education.
``Years ago when we applied to get into district contests, we were turned away,'' said Barbie Lay, president of Johnson County (Kan).
Parent Educators, which has more than 900 families as members.
``But doors continued to open as more numbers of us started knocking on them saying, `Can we get our children involved'?
'' No firm statistics exist on the prevalence of home education, but experts say it's becoming more popular.
According to the Center for Home School Education in Virginia, as many as 1.7 million children in the United States are taught at home.
About 30,000 to 35,000 live in Missouri, and 15,000 to 17,500 in Kansas.
In the early days of the movement, most parents home schooled for religious reasons, and not all of the students did so well, said Peter Rosenstein, executive director of the National Association for Gifted Children.
``But now a lot of gifted kids become home schooled because their school can't meet their needs,'' he said.
Brown is a stellar example.
When he was 11 and ready for sixth grade, his mother said, she wanted him in the Blue Springs School District's gifted program.
She says she was told that he hadn't lived in the district long enough to be properly tested and therefore wasn't yet eligible.
The Browns had moved from California two years earlier.
``We decided his needs were not being met and he would be educated at home,'' said Brown's mother, Robin Brown.
``He was our experimental child''.
By 16, Brown was enrolled at Longview Community College.
While his peers in the class of 2000 were collecting high school diplomas, he was getting his associate's degree.
Brown starts a pre-med program at the University of Missouri-Columbia in the fall.
He wants to be a doctor or medical researcher.
``I think being home schooled made the difference,'' said Brown, who is 18.
``If I had stayed in public school I wouldn't be where I am now''.
Brown was not a contest joiner, but his 13-year-old brother, Grant, wants to be.
He's constructing a Web page he will enter in a local technology competition this summer.
He learned about the contest from other homeschoolers he chats with via computer.
Public schools still have the advantage in areas like science and sports.
But as even more resources become available, advocates of the movement predict that homeschoolers will be more competitive in those arenas, too.
``Home-schooled children are just like public school children _ they are all different and they learn differently,'' said Robin Brown, who is teaching Grant and his sister Nicole, 11, at home, while their brothers, Nathan, 10, Ephraim, 7, and Caleb, 6, attend Young Elementary School.
Robin and her husband, David Brown, dispute those who say only the gifted home schoolers are successful.
But Cathy Zeysing, owner of Cathy's Creative Dance School in Independence, has noticed that the homeschoolers in her studio who excel are also otherwise exceptional.
Zeysing is a parent, and she teaches remedial reading in Blue Springs schools.
Like others involved in mainstream education, she wonders whether the home schooler can be well-rounded.
``I am a teacher and I don't think I have all the skills to teach my child everything my child would need to be successful in life,'' Zeysing said.
``My hats go off to parents who do this''.
The Browns say it's not easy, but the key is remembering this: ``Gifted is a relative term''.
Their daughter Nicole doesn't like to read.
She prefers crafts and animals but has read many of the same books Grant has read.
``She is also pretty good at the hula,'' her dad said.
But unlike Grant, their mother said, Nicole probably will not go to college.
She wants to go to cosmetology school.
``I tell her fine, just do your best.
Nicole will probably be a gifted hairdresser.''
WASHINGTON (AP) --The growing home school movement commanded an audience Friday with five of the nine Republicans running for president, each proclaiming that if parents want to teach their children at home, the government should let them.
``We view home schooling as something to be respected and something to be protected,'' Texas Gov.
George W.
Bush told a conference of the Home School Legal Defense Association.
``Respected for the energy and commitment of loving mothers and loving fathers.
Protected --protected -- from the interference of government''.
The candidates, who appeared separately in the Daughters of the American Revolution auditorium, were unanimous in their salute of the movement's progress.
An association-sponsored study last spring showed that home-schooled students, numbering an estimated 1.5 million, score well above the national median on standardized tests and often study above their normal grade level.
``No parent in America should be forced to send their child to a lousy school.
Period,'' said publisher Steve Forbes.
``You've shamed the regular school systems with what you've achieved.
For those who have carped and criticized and said, 'What about socialization'?...
you look at some of our schools, you call that socialization''?
Gary Bauer, an undersecretary in President's Reagan's Education Department, promised, ``When I'm in the White House, you will have a reliable friend for home schooling sitting in the Oval Office''.
Home-schooling parents are ``on the front lines, the cutting edge of the education debate,'' Bauer said.
The speaker's roster of presidential candidates, including Republicans Pat Buchanan and Alan Keyes, plus independent New Hampshire Sen.
Bob Smith, was testimony to the potency of education in this campaign and the growing appeal of home schooling among religious and political conservatives disenchanted with public schools.
Since the association was founded in 1983, when home schooling was not even legal in all 50 states as it is today, the number of children whose parents eschew schools for at-home lessons grew from a couple hundred to today's estimate of 1.5 million to 1.7 million, said HSLDA spokesman Richard Jefferson.
During a musical slide show between political speakers and prayer offerings, the audience --sprinkled with baby strollers and slouched children in play clothes -- burst into applause when the screen flashed Patrick Henry's immortal line, ``Give me liberty or give me death''.
Michael Farris, president of the Virginia-based association, said his 65,000-member families --up from 29,000 in 1993 -- have just one message to Washington policymakers: ``Leave us alone''.
Bush offered just a couple sentences on home schooling before launching into his standard stump speech.
``I know this might not be the proper forum for a political speech,'' Bush said.
``But I can't resist''.
He encouraged activism by his religious audience.
``The role of the president is to say to people of faith, 'You're welcome to help change America because changing hearts will change America for the better,''' Bush said.
Jan Childress, visiting from Kalona, Iowa, with her home-schooled son, sported a Keyes campaign button.
But, after hearing Bush, she told a reporter: ``Maybe it won't be so bad if he is elected.
I'm beginning to feel like I can more trust what he's saying.''
DENVER (AP) --When Sherie Ferguson learned two teen-age gunmen opened fire at Columbine High, she jumped in her car and sped through traffic to find her daughter, a 15-year-old freshman at a neighboring high school.
The next day, with the death toll in the Littleton school massacre at 15, Ms.
Ferguson decided she would teach Brandi at home.
``Sending her back to Bear Creek, where security is virtually nonexistent, to me that's gambling,'' said Ms.
Ferguson, a single parent.
``Look at all the copy cats.
I don't think it's going to stop.
How can it''?
It is too early to know how many parents will opt for home schooling, but educators in Colorado said there was a 30 percent to 40 percent increase in interest immediately after Dylan Klebold, 17, and Eric Harris, 18, went on their rampage April 20.
The two seniors killed 12 classmates and a teacher and injured 25 others at Columbine before committing suicide.
A month later, Thomas Solomon Jr.
, 15, was accused of wounding six students at Heritage High School in Conyers, Ga.
, amplifying jitters about school safety.
``There's a tension out there, and parents are very curious what they can do about it,'' said Brian Ray of the National Home Education Research Institute in Oregon.
``Many people see home schooling as a way to protect children''.
Although the number of headline-seizing, multiple-victim attacks recently has gone up, government figures show a general decline in school crime.
In a report released last year, the Education Department found 90 percent of schools reported no serious violent crime in 1996-1997.
Fewer students brought weapons to schools, based on surveys beginning in 1993 of students in grades 9-12.
And the overall crime rate at schools dropped between 1993-1996, based on surveys of students 12-19.
``My feeling is that it is not the safety issue as much as that that was the last straw,'' said Michael Kasson of the Colorado Home Educators Association.
For most parents, the decision to home school can take years and is based on numerous factors, including the quality of public school education, the specific needs of a child, a wish to emphasize moral or religious guidelines, or distance from the nearest school, particularly in rural areas.
Increasingly, however, parents are citing security as a reason for turning living rooms into classrooms.
``It certainly was a stick in the fire,'' said Terry Deharsh, a locksmith who attended the Christian Home Educators of Colorado's recent statewide conference on home schooling.
Although there is an elementary school across the street from the Deharshes' home in Greeley, Deharsh and his wife, Lindee, plan to home school their 5-year-old daughter.
``Thrill-seekers are going to look for a group,'' Deharsh said.
``If someone wants to kill my daughter at home, they have to know her, they have to have a reason to kill her and they have to come looking for her''.
Even without Columbine, the number of home schoolers has increased 7 percent to 15 percent nationally in the past five years, with up to 1.6 million children home schooled in 1998, according to National Home Education Research Institute.
Suzy Parker, director of the Colorado Department of Education's home schooling program, said she received five calls a day, twice the normal amount, from parents seeking information in the month that followed the Columbine shooting.
In several states with fatal school-related shootings --Pearl, Miss.
West Paducah, Ky.
Jonesboro, Ark.
Edinboro, Pa.
and Springfield, Ore.
--there may have been an increase in interest in home schooling, but not necessarily in numbers.
``What comes mostly is we get more opportunities to speak, to go talk to people about it,'' said Richard Karman, chairman of the board of the Oregon Christian Home Education Association Network.
``Those requests are up probably, a ball park figure, maybe as much as up a third.''
Once upon a time, immigrant families turned to the public schools to Americanize their children: teach them English, introduce them to the broader culture, and point them in the direction of the streets paved with gold.
But today, as the melting pot metaphor is eclipsed by multiculturalism, more and more Americans are rejecting public schools and turning to home schooling in an effort to safeguard their children's cultural and religious identity.
Muslims, one of the United States' fastest-growing populations, are following the lead of other groups, including evangelical Christians, in opting out of American public schools.
``They're growing up as Americans, and they have to integrate, but we want them to keep their Islamic identity intact, and not have it washed away or assaulted,'' said Beverly Beresford, a 36-year-old Muslim mother of three teaching her children at home.
The surge in home schooling is part of a broader trend in which many Americans driven by moral as well as educational concerns are choosing religious, charter, and pilot schools for their children.
For some, it's a development that raises fundamental, even troubling, questions about the future of public education.
``We are living at a time in which the schools are under attack, and people are seeking alternatives,'' said Arthur E.
Levine, president of Teachers College at Columbia University.
``The nature of socialization has also changed,'' he said.
``Once the hope of people entering was that they would become Americanized and indistinct from the pack.
Now we're having a battle over how much we want in common and how much we want to be different''.
Muslim home-schoolers scoff at the suggestion that their children might somehow be isolated from the larger culture because they are home schooled.
Their children play in sports leagues with non-Muslim children, go on field trips with non-Muslim children, meet with non-Muslim home-schoolers, and are inundated with mainstream American culture, they say.
``We're not trying to withdraw or create a shell _ that's unrealistic and unfair to the children,'' Beresford said.
The challenge, Beresford and other parents say, is communicating Islamic faith, history, and values to their children in the face of the broader and more dominant culture.
``Muslims are a new, emerging community, and a number of them are not happy with the public-schooling system, either because they feel that the schools are not really teaching their kids right or they object that they are not paying attention to moral issues,'' said Aly Abuzaakouk, executive director of the American Muslim Council, who said education is the top concern of Muslims in America.
``There is a secular turn in public schooling that Muslim families are not happy with, and some of those who are not able to join Muslim schools do home schooling''.
The Muslim home-schooling movement resembles, and in some ways piggybacks on, the wider home-schooling movement popularized by evangelical Christians since the 1980s.
The Christian home-schoolers cite many of the same reasons as Muslims _ a desire to inculcate their children with values and behavioral norms that are off-limits in public schools.
``If a person has a strong belief in the area of religion, they're going to want to pass it on to their children, and the only effective way is to teach them at home,'' said Michael Smith, president of the Home School Legal Defense Association.
The organization estimates that 1.7 million American youngsters are now home schooled _ a number contested as too high by some _ and although the majority are thought to be white evangelical Christians with highly educated parents, Smith said his group is seeing rapid growth in home schooling among other religious groups, such as Muslims and Catholics.
But for American Muslims _ an ethnically diverse and fast-growing group whose population is estimated to be 6 million to 7 million _ it is not yet clear whether home schooling will be a permanent part of the landscape or a temporary phenomenon until the community builds more private schools.
Already there are two Muslim grade schools in Greater Boston, the Al-Hamra Academy in Northborough and the Islamic Academy of New England in Sharon.
There are no statistics about the numbers of Muslim home-schoolers in this country, but it is clear that most Muslims still send their children to public schools and depend on weekend Islamic schools for religious instruction.
Nevertheless, there are several organizations devoted to the topic, including the Muslim Home School Network (www.muslimhomeschool.com), which is hosting a home-schooling convention in Sharon on Saturday and Sunday.
The organization is directed by Cynthia Sulaiman, a mother of four, who started her eldest children in the public schools but then decided to teach her family at home.
Like Sulaiman, Beresford sent her eldest son to public school for a year before deciding to try home schooling.
``Our local school is quite good, but we felt that because in Islam, you want to integrate religion into all aspects of life, we could achieve that better by home schooling,'' she said.
Beresford and Sulaiman teach their children at home for some of the same reasons cited by other home-schooling parents: a desire for safety, a concern about the secular nature of public schools, and a hope their children will do better with individual attention.
But they have other, less familiar concerns: They want their children to pray five times a day, they want their daughters to be able to cover their heads without fear of teasing, and they don't want boys mixing socially with girls.
They teach the basics _ reading, writing, and mathematics _ alongside Islamic history, culture, and religion.
Beresford and Sulaiman are both converts to Islam who married immigrants from Islamic countries.
Scholars say home schooling has been particularly popular among American Muslim families in which at least one parent was born in the United States, perhaps because the home-schooling phenomenon is most familiar to Americans, and perhaps because of a concern that children of converts are thought to be less likely to retain their parents' chosen faith.
``There are more parents who want to do it, but feel they are not equipped, and those who are equipped are often African-American or Euro-American Muslims,'' said Shabbir Mansuri, executive director of the Council on Islamic Education, a California-based organization that works to improve and expand the depiction of Islam and Muslims in textbooks.
Variations of home schooling, such as groups of families teaching their children together, have been popular particularly among African-American Muslims, said Ilyas Ba-Yunus, a sociologist at State University of New York at Cortland.
``Many of these people are new converts who are very unhappy with the drugs and guns and dating and sex that they consider to be un-Islamic,'' Ba-Yunus said.
``They think their own teaching at home will be morally strong, and that they will be able to counter whatever immoral things are happening in school.
They're not always successful, but this is their logic.''
WEST PALM BEACH, Fla.
_ One problem with home schooling: There are too many parts in the school play for one little family.
Nine-year-old Kaemmerle Fitzpatrick must be a red-scarfed sailor set sail for Roanoke Island, as well as an aproned lady expecting the first English baby in the colony.
She and her sister, 10-year-old Annika, the white-wigged captain, take off for the New World on a lawn chair.
But it's their mother, Freya Fitzpatrick, who thinks of herself as the real pioneer in this suburban Lantana back yard.
She has taught her two girls at home for the past seven years _ before the home-schooling magazines sold, the Orlando conventions opened, and the trendy (and home-schooled) Hanson brothers inspired widespread teen love.
The Fitzpatrick sisters are two of the 2,240 Palm Beach County students who may sit barefoot at their kitchen desks this year, while their parents put on teaching caps.
Since 1994, their numbers have tripled in Palm Beach County and nearly doubled statewide.
There were 31,440 Florida students home schooled last year.
In Palm Beach County, home-schooled students must register with the district superintendent's office.
State law also requires them to keep a portfolio that can be shown to the superintendent on 15 days' notice.
The rapidly increasing numbers may be due, in part, to new state laws.
In 1996, home-schooled students were allowed to participate in sports and music programs at high schools.
And as of May 1997, they may apply to two-year colleges with merely an affidavit signed by their parent.
The school district doesn't keep figures on how many home-schooling students participate in public school activities or enroll in high school classes, but a few do, said district spokesman Nat Harrington.
The home-schooling community here offers at least six support groups from Boca Raton to Palm Beach Gardens.
They meet weekly for martial arts in Royal Palm Beach; they buy blocks of tickets for Kravis Center events; and they hold their own spelling bees.
There are chess and stock market clubs, field trips to the Space Center and SeaWorld, and special classes taught by parents: How to measure temperature using a cricket.
As the home-schooling community has grown, it has become more diverse.
It is not exclusively white or Christian anymore.
And the reasons parents are choosing it also are becoming more varied.
When state specialist Mary Lou Carruthers started talking to home-schooling parents three years ago, there were mainly two reasons for their choice: They had wanted the little ones to learn about Christ in the classroom, or they worried about drugs, knives and guns.
More and more, parents talk about the latter, the safety issue, she said.
In Palm Beach County, parents also talk about crowded classrooms and they worry their children might not get their teacher's attention, said Beth Kramer, local director of the Florida Parent Educators Association, who has taught five children at home.
Before deciding to home school, Freya Fitzpatrick considered Indian Pines Elementary, less than a mile from her home.
But administrators said no when she asked to spend a day in a kindergarten class, she said.
``If they're not willing to let me see school in action, I'm not comfortable sending my daughter there,'' she said.
Fitzpatrick, who has a master's degree in education, taught five years in public and private schools.
When she first heard about home schooling, she thought it was a terrible idea.
``I thought it just had to be one of the craziest things that parents who weren't educators could think they could teach.
It was presumptuous,'' she said.
But out of desperation, she bought alphabet posters and measuring cups, and then realized she'd have plenty of help.
Her father gives tennis lessons, her former Latin professor advises, and other parents offer geology and Spanish classes.
``I am the general contractor and I know how I want the house to turn out.
Not everybody wants to build a Christian child; they might want a non-religious or Muslim child.
That's the nice thing about home schooling, you can choose,'' she said.
For an educator like Fitzpatrick, it's an exciting opportunity.
She can build an entire human being as if she were painting a whole picture, not just the corner, she said.
Their day starts at 8:15 a.m. with violin lessons.
At 8:30, Fitzpatrick and her girls kneel under a homemade time line that notes both Moses and William Tell, and recite the Lord's Prayer.
They belong to the New Church _ the girls' father and grandfather were missionaries _ which broke from the Methodists 200 years ago.
The church emphasizes independent thinking, Fitzpatrick said.
Fitzpatrick's schedule, which she plans months ahead, sets out 15 or 30-minute blocks for Russian, Swedish, Spanish and traditional subjects like math and dictation.
When they fall minutes behind, she says, ``We're wasting time!
And that's what life is made of''.
But not all home schoolers are so organized.
``Unschoolers,'' who believe learning should be naturally led by the children, wouldn't have planned classes.
They might spend a week learning about bats, if their children felt like it, and go to the zoo, build a bat house, and read bat books.
During spring break, home-schooled students can take a standardized test, or a certified teacher can gauge their progress by looking at a student's portfolio at the end of the year.
The Florida Parent Educators Association encourages parents to find a teacher who ``understands home-schooling philosophies''.
The students only have to show appropriate progress for their age, according to state law.
The state has never been able to compare the achievement of home-schooled students against public school students, as much as they'd like to, Carruthers said.
One national study shows the average home schooler scores at the 73rd percentile on the Iowa Test of Basic Skills.
The national average is 50.
Those results are unreliable because the students in the study were selected by the researcher, a home schooler himself, Carruthers said.
On Monday afternoons, Annika has chemistry _ she wants to live on a Mars colony some day _ and she skips around the kitchen wearing safety glasses.
For an experiment on the atomic weight of magnesium, the Fitzpatrick's gas stove must be a home-schooling Bunsen (cq) burner.
Annika would be a fifth-grader, if enrolled in public school, but she works at a sixth-grade level, sometimes seventh- and eighth-grade, her mother said.
Socially, she may not be comfortable with her peers in a public school unless they were gifted, she added.
The girls do socialize.
They take karate on Monday afternoons with 30 other students and roller skate on Fridays.
They belong to a New Church youth group, a home-schooling aviation club and 4-H Explorers Club.
When neighbor kids stop by, Annika flops down on the carpet with a board game and offers to teach the competition.
``I don't need sixth grade, I've already done all their work and some of the work I do is high-school work,'' Annika said.
She and her sister work unsupervised for much of the day.
Freya Fitzpatrick wants them to learn responsibility, as well as their spelling words.
Kaemmerle still needs a little help.
Each plastic block holds one flea, according to today's fanciful lesson plan, but Kaemmerle has no idea how many fleas fit in her seven-story hotel.
(It has four rooms on each level).
She doesn't remember yesterday's math equation _ volume equals height times area _ and she doesn't want to admit it.
So she cries at the dining room table and snaps at her mother.
``You haven't taught me,'' she accuses.
``It's not that I haven't taught you, you don't remember,'' replies Freya Fitzpatrick.
``We've talked about this before, but every so often you get confused, which is OK.
It's why we're here''.
Fitzpatrick has uncommon patience, but it breaks occasionally.
She is the only authority for her children for much of the day.
When they stop listening to her, it might be time for regular school, she said.
The girls say never.
``I like home schooling.
We can have some decision in what we learn and she can focus on just us, not a whole class,'' Kaemmerle said.
``She's our mother, we have her attention''.
But their mother is clear-eyed about the whole adventure.
Someday her children might need lessons that she's unable to teach.
Someday her husband, an accountant at Office Depot, might not want to shoulder the financial burden alone.
But right now, she believes there's no better education for her girls.
By the way, Kaemmerle figures it out _ yes, it's 28 fleas _ and tosses the paper across the dining room table.
``Happy''? the 9-year-old asks her mom.
``Yes,'' comes the reply.
Story Filed By Cox Newspapers For Use By Clients of the New York Times News Service
PALO ALTO, Calif.
_ Education reformers of conservative or libertarian stripe are already hanging crepe for the school voucher initiative on the California ballot next month.
It will be a major blow to their movement nationally if voters in the most populous state reject, for the second time in less than 10 years, the idea of giving public money to parents to help students escape public schools.
Vouchers are an intellectually interesting but largely untested article of faith for many in the camp that correctly diagnoses the poor state of public education but then often fixates on teachers unions, vehement opponents of vouchers, as the taproot of a problem that has far more diverse causes.
The California initiative, Proposition 38, would give parents $4,000 for every school-age child that could be spent for any form of currently sanctioned education _ including parochial, secular private, charter school, home schooling.
It's the brainchild of high-tech venture capitalist Tim Draper, a guy with more money than political skill.
Draper unwisely rejected pleas of some voucher supporters to target the proposal for the poor or on demonstrably wretched schools (which are virtually one and the same thing).
He also did not seek to insulate the measure from criticism that helped doom a similar California initiative in 1993, especially a lack of rules to guarantee equity and access in private education.
Draper has pledged to spend up to $20 million on the campaign.
And with the issue tanking, he has offered Hawaiian vacations, computers and shopping sprees to folks who'll sign up supporters.
But it seems a lost cause, Stanford political scientist _ and voucher supporter _ Terry Moe told a Hoover Institution seminar staffed by what the professor called ``a small band of nonconformists''.
``Who is supporting this?
No one,'' Moe said.
``It's a bump along the road that didn't have to be there''.
The most recent statewide survey of the Public Policy Institute of California showed more than a majority of likely voters already oppose Prop.
38 _ a near-fatal standing for a ballot initiative a month before an election.
The PPIC analysis is that the measure ``faces an uphill battle in large part because it is not viewed as a solution to improving schools or student performance''.
A similar fate may await a voucher initiative next month in Michigan, where even Republican Gov.
John Engler opposes the proposal, which at heart is a repeal of the state's constitutional ban on public aid to private schools.
The Michigan plan would provide just over $3,000 of state money per child in districts that graduate less than two-thirds of their students _ a formula that would include the giant (and egregiously problem-ridden) Detroit system and about 30 others statewide.
Among the initiative's biggest backers is the self-interested Roman Catholic Church, operator of the state's largest private school system.
Model sermons are being drafted for pre-election exhortations.
The National Education Association, the nation's largest teachers union, is, as usual, playing tough.
At its national convention in July, the NEA instituted a &QL; $5-a-member assessment to fight voucher programs, $3 of which (or some $6 million) is earmarked for the ``no'' campaigns in California and Michigan.
Only about 50,000 students are in voucher programs, meaning suggestions of success are anecdotal at best and provide far too sketchy findings on which to base wholesale changes in the nation's education system, even as troubled as it admittedly is.
Given vouchers' political baggage and the prospect of approaching bad luck at the polls, it seems that incremental advances with smaller, experimental programs, for vouchers as well as other proposals, would be a better way to go.
But that suggestion from the Hoover audience drew what seemed to be an unappreciative sneer from some of the crusading ``nonconformists''.
Chester Finn, a Vanderbilt professor and Manhattan Institute fellow who was a Reagan administration Education Department official, said that reaching for something bold and extreme sometimes allows the merely interesting to bubble up.
That could be a desirable cause and effect, but there is little evidence that it's actually occurring.
Hines is a Houston Chronicle columnist based in Washington, D.C.
(cragg.hineschron.com) XXX END OF STORY $$$
Fragrant Night Bloomers Q.
I love fragrant plants, but I don't like bees!
Is there anything I can grow that will perfume the garden without attracting insects?
A. Perfume that doesn't attract insects would be a horticultural oxymoron: putting out the come hither for pollinating bugs is a flower's raison d'etre, and perfume is a large part of the mating dance.
But you can have a fragrant garden low on bees by planting flowers and shrubs that open their blossoms at night.
Choices range from the small, inconspicuous, but mighty perfumed annual known as night-blooming stock (Matthiola bicornis) to the many cultivated varieties of Brugmansia, a tropical tree that can grow to 10 feet and has been showing up in nurseries under the name angels' trumpets.
All parts of Brugmansia are highly poisonous, but there's no denying the plant's appeal.
Its huge flowers blare tropical sweetness from dusk until almost sunup.
White is the most common color, and usually the most fragrant, but Brugmansia also comes in yellow, orange, peaches and pinks.
You'd never know it from the modern cultivars, which have been bred to stay open during the day, but old fashioned flowering tobacco (Nicotiana alata) has a very strong night perfume, and so does its much taller, more architecturally splendid cousin, N.
sylvestris. Other candidates include moonflower vines, night-blooming jasmine, evening primrose and the oddball Pardon Me, a day lily that doesn't get going until the sun goes down.
Brugmansia and matthiola are widely sold.
Pardon me (and other fragrant night bloomers) can be mail ordered from Snow Creek Daylily Gardens, P.O.
Box 2007, 330 P Street, Port Townsend, Wash.
98368, (360) 385-1738, catalog, $3.
Pardon Me is also sold by Abundant Daylilies, H.C. 78, Box 187, Star City, Ark.
71667, (870) 628-4820, free price list.
The Potato Beetle Wars Q.
Help! Colorado potato beetles are destroying my potato plants.
I've been trying to go the organic route, handpicking them every day.
It's not working.
If I don't do something soon, I'm afraid the plants will die.
&QL; A.
Leptinotarsa decemlineata, to give the miserable creature its proper name, is among the most difficult garden pests to control, organically or otherwise.
Don't panic.
Potato plants can take a lot of defoliation and still produce a decent crop.
But do take action, employing multiple strategies for best results.
Start by applying a dose of the organic gardener's friend, Bacillus thuringiensis var.
san diego (or var.
tenebrionis). It is effective at killing small larvae, though only after they've consumed some of it.
This means spraying thoroughly (and repeatedly) according to the directions that come with the stuff.
It also means you're still stuck with larger larvae and adults.
Those can be killed with rotenone, a comparatively mild botanical poison permitted for use by organic gardeners.
Neem extract (Azadirachtin) is also on the organic list.
Well-stocked garden centers and farm supply stores will usually have these products.
Handpicking is still very useful, if it includes crushing the clusters of bright orange-yellow eggs that hide under the leaves.
It costs nothing, it doesn't pollute or kill any other creatures.
It keeps populations down and soothes gardeners, who if they have potato beetles, also have frustrations and aggressions that need release.
Unfortunately, it's not perfect.
No matter how thorough you are, you always miss a few, and you don't have to miss many to lose the war.
A single female can have 10,000 decendants by the end of summer.
One advantage (for the beetles) of numbers like these is the chance at resistant mutations.
No matter which controls you use, a few will be resistant, and those few will be multitudes ere long.
That's why it's important to attack on several fronts.
To add insult to infestation, Colorado potato beetles can live a full two years.
But they won't stay around where there's nothing to eat, so the final, or first, line of defense is late planting.
If they don't find any potato, eggplant or nicotiana leaves when they emerge from the ground in spring, they'll leave.
More will appear, but if you can thwart that first wave, subsequent ones will be much smaller.
Address questions to Garden Q&AMP;A, The New York Times, 229 West 43d St.
, New York 10036, or by e-mail to gardening(AT)nytimes.com.
Those of general interest will be published.
Unpublished questions cannot be answered individually. &QL;
Spiders kill off insects and help plants boost seed production in exchange for dollops of sugary nectar, say scientists in New Jersey.
Many species of plants produce enticing nectar bonuses known as extrafloral nectaries (EFNs).
The EFNs attract ants which defend the plant against leaf-eating insects in return for the sweet treats.
Some tropical tree species can die without the ants' protection.
Only a few spiders are known to take an interest in EFNs.
To find out more, Steven Handel and Scott Ruhren from the State University of New Jersey in New Brunswick studied the interactions between jumping spiders from the genera Eris and Metaphidippus, and a yellow-flowered legume (Chamaecrista nictitans) common to the eastern United States.
Greenhouse experiments showed the spiders jumped onto plants with active EFNs six times more often than they visited those without, and regularly ate the extra nectar.
The plants also benefited from the spiders' presence in the field, with seed production rising by 8 percent.
''This is the first evidence that spiders can increase plants' fitness in terms of seed production,'' says Handel.
''It's a completely unexpected link in nature''.
Most spiders sit and wait for their prey, says Handel, but jumping spiders move around and are aggressive _ just like the ants that protect trees.
Handel suspects the spiders play as vital a role as ants in protecting plants.
''Most people hate spiders.
Now there is finally one reason to like them,'' he says.
&UR; (This article is excerpted from New Scientist, a weekly science and technology magazine based in London).
&LR; &QC;
ROCKY MOUNT, N.C.
_ A growing trend among gardeners today is organic gardening.
Maybe you've thought about starting an organic garden, but it seemed too overwhelming.
It really isn't.
If you can grow a conventional garden, you can grow an organic one, said Dr.
Mary Peet, a professor in the department of horticultural sciences at N.C.
State University.
Organic gardeners don't use synthetic fertilizers or pesticides on plants.
When you garden organically, you think of your plants as part of a whole system within nature that starts in the soil and includes the water supply, wildlife and even insects.
Just like you would do if you were starting a conventional garden, look around your yard for an area that receives 6 to 8 hours of direct sunlight daily.
Prepare the site by loosening the soil with a shovel.
Add several inches of compost to it.
Vegetables, fruits, herbs and flowers thrive best in raised beds, which are built 4 to 6 inches above the ground, Peet said.
Soil in raised beds drains quickly so plants never sit in water.
When selecting plants, choose ones that aren't prone to diseases.
Ask your neighborhood nursery and garden center for help in selecting plants.
``Most organic gardeners go through a trial-and-error period,'' said Jeffery Hedgepeth, manager at The Green Thumb Nursery in Rocky Mount.
``Gardeners usually have to experiment to find the best crops or plants that work best with their soil conditions.
We can only help point you in the right direction''.
Conventional gardeners control weeds with herbicides, but not organic gardeners.
They arm themselves with mulch.
Decaying plant wastes, such as grass clippings, leaves and vegetable scraps from the kitchen are great building blocks for compost, the ideal organic matter for your garden soil.
``Reuse and recycle,'' Peet said.
``Don't put waste in the trash when you can put it back in the ground.
Live with nature, not against it''.
A layer of mulch blocks light from weeds and stops or slows their growth.
If weeds make their way to the surface, Peet says, buy a good hoe and get to work.
Conventional gardeners apply pesticides to the garden to ward off threatening insects.
Organic gardeners don't use synthetic chemicals, but they can take other steps to protect their garden from pests.
Insects usually attack stressed or sick plants.
The best defenses against insect attack are preventative measures, Peet said.
Grow plants suited to the site and they'll be less stressed.
Don't let plants get too wet, too dry or too shaded.
Many plant diseases are encouraged by constant moisture and too little air circulating around plants, Peet said.
To remedy that, plan your garden with enough room to accommodate full-grown plants, because water evaporates more slowly and air doesn't circulate well among crowded plants.
Organic gardeners work constantly to build nutrient-rich soil.
Peet describes the ideal soil as dark-colored, sweet smelling and full of earthworms.
Gardeners can achieve ideal soil by continually adding organic matter, such as compost or manure, to their soil.
Interest in organically grown food is evident at grocery stores everywhere.
Consumers are reading labels and buying products that were raised without synthetic fertilizers or pesticides.
Story Filed By Cox Newspapers For Use By Clients of the New York Times News Service
CHANGSHA, March 22 (Xinhua) --Spiders once were considered disgusting for their dangerous, ugly appearance.
However, for local paddy growers in the Dongting Lake area in central China, spiders have become their best friends for killing pests.
Some paddy land has been idle to set up safety for spiders.
"If the spiders can pass the winter safely, the pests will not be a threat to the crops," says a local farmer.
Chinese books written 2,000 years ago read, "All are happy when spiders are flourishing".
A spider eats five-to-six insect pests every day, a local expert says.
The lake area is the first in China to study pest control with spiders.
Many local villages have benefited ecologically.
"The area used to be plagued by pests," recalls Liu Hui, a local expert in Xiangyin County, Hunan Province, "and chemicals had been used as the only weapon to fight them".
The amount of chemicals used was drastically reduced after spiders were introduced, which has resulted in better quality of farm products, according to the expert.
According to local officials, the natural technology has become popular in the area and is expected to be adopted by farmers in other parts of the country.
Nevertheless, local people want to gain something from their invention.
Xiangyin County plans to turn its vast spider-guarded farmlands into a new destination for tourists, and a school for outside farmers who are eager to learn the cost-effective natural technology.
BEIJING, May 17 (Xinhua) --Beijing has sold out of ladybugs and other varieties of pest-eating insects, as residents of the Chinese capital have opted for a cheap and environmentally- friendly means of pest control.
The city's supply of several million ladybugs had been housed by the Biological Prevention Institute of the Chinese Academy of Agricultural Science for use in scientific experiments.
But they went on sale when the prevalence of plant pests in the city in the first four months of the year created public outcry, today's Beijing Daily reported.
During the same period, tens of thousands of insects kept by the Chinese Academy of Forestry Science also became hot items in short supply.
Increasingly, Beijing's parks and work units are battling pests with bugs.
The Temple of Heaven Park, Beijing's first park to use the pest-control insects, initiated the method in 1991.
The park has brought in a large quantity of insects to kill tree pests this year and the results have been good, according to park officials.
A researcher with the biological prevention institute of the Chinese Academy of Agricultural Science said his institute has bred over a dozen species of insects for pest control in the past decade.
He said the anti-pest insects can also be applied to crops, and for vegetable and fruit tree growth, and will help to improve the quality of farm produce.
Ladybugs are less expensive than pesticides, selling for a few cents apiece.
BUFFALO, N.Y.
(AP) --The city plans to make a party out of hunting for grubs by hand as its phase-out of pesticide use begins in earnest.
Hundreds of volunteers will be enlisted for an August get-together, at which they will comb a municipal golf course for signs of the grass-destroying pests that have wreaked havoc in the past.
The goals are early detection and organic solutions.
Buffalo last year joined Albany, San Francisco and a handful of other municipalities that have committed to stopping virtually all pesticide use on city property.
Buffalo's Pesticide Sunset Ordinance took effect in September.
''This is brand new for us,'' said Gary Carrel of the Buffalo Olmsted Parks Conservancy, which is making plans for the first grub-scouting party at the Delaware Park golf course.
Rather than spray the entire course with dangerous chemicals, volunteers will target problem areas in an organized effort.
The hunters will line up five-to-10 feet apart and walk forward in tandem along the fairways, stopping at intervals to pull up small sections of ground and examine them for grubs before replacing them.
''These efforts are more environmentally friendly,'' but, he said, ''they also take a large volunteer force''.
So came the idea for the grub-scouting party.
The hope is there will be no sign of the pests, which staged a major infestation in 1995.
If they are detected, however, there are several non-chemical solutions being considered, including the use of parasitic nematodes which feed on the larvae but don't harm the ground.
Chemical spraying would be a last resort.
''It's just moving to a whole environmentally friendly way,'' Carrel said.
''Golf courses are traditionally very chemical dependent''.
Under the city's Pesticide Sunset Ordinance, the most dangerous chemicals will be eliminated first, followed by the less hazardous pesticides.
Exemptions will be allowed for nontoxic and low-level pesticides and city departments can get waivers in emergencies.
Delaware Park has become a sort of testing ground for environmentally friendly groundskeeping.
The park's rose garden is being tended with organic compound and soon will be watered with a drip-irrigation system, rather than sprinklers, which soak the whole plant and encourage fungus growth, and in turn, pesticide use.
City officials hope residents will follow suit and stop using harmful chemicals on their own lawns.
''Part of our mission is to increase public awareness,'' said Nancy Smith, co-chairwoman of the Pest Management Board, which was formed to help guide the city away from its chemical dependency.
''The exciting thing is, we're getting phone calls from around the country.
We're considered a leader in this.''
Adjectivally speaking, the most coveted garden flowers tend to be choice, delicate, exquisite or elegant, and preferably also fragrant.
Roses, in other words, or lilies or lilacs or masses of sky-blue flax on gracefully nodding stems, but definitely not marigolds.
Not many would describe the fat, heavy flower of a marigold, jammed so full of petals that it looks more like a Koosh ball than a blossom, as delicate or elegant.
Odoriferous comes to mind, but not fragrant.
Still, there are other attributes worth considering in a garden flower.
Colorful, easy, reliable and pest-free are not bad adjectives, and if the marigold is more often thought of as common than as choice, those qualities may explain why.
There is much good to say about a flower with a sunny disposition and a desire to please.
In August, when most perennials are in their summer sulk and the annual flower garden looks a bit ratty, marigolds can be counted on to look presentable.
The season is long, and fidelity in a flower is as praiseworthy as flamboyance.
They don't look any different than they did in late June _ mounds of roly-poly flowers in shades of orange, yellow and sort-of red _ but marigolds look good when their neighbors are starting to fade.
Indeed, it would be nice to be an iris in one's youth and a marigold in middle age.
It's true that a large bed of one variety of marigold can be a bit boring.
The plants are so uniform that a mass looks stiff and soldierly.
They look better planted in clumps among other annuals or in drifts in front of evergreens or shrubs.
But there are so many varieties of marigold that it would be fun to plant a marigold library, the way some botanical gardens plant libraries of daffodils and roses.
There could be tall African marigolds, rising to three feet or more, and sprightly dwarf French marigolds, some only six inches tall.
Giant-flowered hybrid marigolds, with their impossibly huge, puffy flowers, could contrast with signet marigolds and their dime-size blooms.
There could be quite an array of flower shapes, too.
Not all marigolds have the carnation form, which is the term used to describe those petal-jammed flowers.
There are many varieties of single-flowered marigolds, which have a single rim of petals and look like gaily colored daisies.
A particularly interesting one is Striped Marvel, which has a single tier of thin petals, red on one half and yellow on the other.
It makes a bushy two-foot plant, but most single-flowered marigolds are dwarf or semi-dwarf varieties that grow no more than a foot tall.
Disco is one of the best, and it comes in a mixture that includes a delightful array of yellow, orange and bicolored flowers.
Marigolds in the Sophia class fall somewhere between the single-flowered and carnation-flowered types _ they have a double rim of petals, russet-red or orange edged with gold.
The marigold color range is limited to oranges, yellows, near-reds and combinations of those colors, although breeders have come up with several varieties so pale yellow that they appear ivory or white.
White marigolds have less of the characteristic scent, making them nice for gardeners who don't grow marigolds because they object to the smell.
To my nose, the scent of marigolds is much nicer than that of some salvias, which smell like a used litter box, but olfactory preferences vary.
The scent is probably why marigolds, which make fine cut flowers, do not get used in floral arrangements more often.
Most of the smell, however, is concentrated in the foliage.
The flowers themselves are almost odorless.
If you strip off the foliage, the scent of marigolds won't permeate the house.
You can also grow marigolds that don't have the characteristic scent.
Signet marigolds (Tagetes tenuifolia), also called gem marigolds, have citrus-scented foliage that is lacier than standard marigold foliage and a lighter shade of green.
The blossoms are small and dainty, with a single rim of petals.
Mexican mint marigold (T.
lucida), also called Mexican tarragon marigold, has the scent of anise and can be used in cooking as a substitute for tarragon.
Some gardeners plant marigolds as a companion to vegetable crops, assuming the scent is a pest repellent.
It's true that some marigolds can help control certain species of destructive nematodes, tiny soil-dwelling worms, but it's a chemical in the marigold roots, not the odor of the foliage, that does the trick.
Only French marigolds (T.
patula) are effective in controlling nematodes.
African marigolds (T.
erecta) and other varieties, including hybrids, won't work.
You also won't see any benefits until the year after the marigolds are grown, because the chemical is released from the roots as they break down in the soil.
If nematodes are a problem in your garden, rotating the vegetable patch with a bed of French marigolds may help.
Simply planting marigolds among the tomatoes and peppers probably won't do much, although it will certainly look nice.
Marigolds like full sun and soil that is decent but not too rich.
To keep them blooming steadily, snap off the spent flower heads occasionally.
There are some sterile varieties, called triploids, that do not set seed and will keep blooming even if the dead flowers are not removed, but even those will look better if they're cleaned up periodically.
If marigolds can't be elegant or exquisite, they can at least be immaculate.
&QL; &QL;
About 40,000 ha of farmland was planted in this mixing pattern in the prefectures of Honghe and Xishuangbanna in the province, said Li.
Yunnan plans to expand the acreage to 70,000 ha next year, and nine provincial areas in China, the country's major rice-producing areas, also plan to introduce the technique following satisfactory experiments of their own, said Li.
He said the Asian Development Bank, one of the sponsors of the program, plans to introduce the technique to countries such as Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia.
In their latest issues published on August 17 or August 18, the weekly science magazines Nature and Science each published a paper by Professor Zhu and his colleagues on the experiments.
Christopher Mundt, a plant pathologist at Oregon State University in Corvallis and a co-author of the paper, explained that different types of rice blast attack different varieties of rice.
In a monoculture field of rice, the blast can spread "like a fire through a field of dry grass".
The fungus has a harder time finding a compatible host in a mixed environment.
In his commentary on the experiments published by Nature, Martin Wolfe, a plant pathologist and research director of the Elm Farm Research Center, an organic farming research center in Britain, supports the approach.
Rice is the staple grain for about 3 billion people, mostly in Asia, or half of the world's population.
&UR; (Distributed by New York Times Special Features) &QL;
Q: Something is chewing small holes in the leaves of my vegetables.
I have looked closely to try to find an insect, and something appears to hop away when I move the leaves.
Any clue as to what this is?
A: Flea beetles are minuscule insects _ adults are about 1/16 inch long and black or greenish-black _ that appear in spring and leap among plants and chew numerous, small holes in leaves.
They hop like fleas, therefore their common name.
If there are enough of them, they can do considerable damage.
Leaves may wilt and turn brown, and the plant may die.
There are several species of flea beetles that damage vegetables and ornamentals.
Among those that visit here are the tobacco flea beetle, the potato flea beetle and the eggplant flea beetle, which prefer nightshade-family plants such as eggplant and tomatoes.
You may find flea beetles in your arugula, broccoli and corn, as well.
This pest is an accidental import, thought to have arrived in North America in the early 1900s, probably from Europe or Asia.
Adult flea beetles hibernate in the soil, then lay eggs in the soil or around the base of a plant.
In a week or so, larvae are feeding on plant roots before pupating and emerging as adults.
Seemingly overnight, flea beetles recently visited our garden, peppering the leaves of two fuchsias with so many small holes that they left mere outlines of the foliage.
If you are an organic gardener, you need quick hands to catch and squish these agile pests, as they bound away with the slightest hint of your approach.
They can slip underneath a leaf before you bat an eye.
Like other beetles, they are hard-bodied, and this, coupled with their acrobatic ability, makes it tough to easily nab them with a pesticide.
The pesticide needs to make good contact with the beetles, so you may be looking at more than one application.
Some of the chemicals commonly used around the garden target the pests.
So do products that contain neem, a botanical pesticide.
Rotenone and pyrethrum products can work, too.
In addition to eliminating as many of the enemy as possible with speedy fingers, the organic gardener has additional options: Use row covers to keep the pests off spring vegetables; repel them with garlic and hot pepper sprays; or capture them on white or yellow sticky traps.
Q: Could you give me some advice on the care of my bearded iris?
I have four different beds with different varieties and differing amounts of sunlight.
All bloom poorly.
What fertilizer should I use?
When and how often?
Do these irises require an acid or alkaline soil?
I water them regularly from early spring to late summer.
Then they get only rainwater until next spring.
When I separate them and give them to friends, these irises bloom quite well.
A: I am not sure which bearded iris you have, but I have found the easiest to be the large-flowered, fragrant ``early purples,'' believed to be a form of ``Iris x germanica,'' or German irises.
``Iris x albicans,'' the cemetery whites, are another group of more easily grown bearded iris.
I have learned from growing these that they prefer to be planted shallowly, demand good drainage and like sun.
And, as you've found, division encourages better flowering.
This is often necessary every three years.
A well-prepared, raised bed of soil enriched with compost or well-rotted manure is important, as well.
These irises tolerate a soil pH between 6 and 9, preferring a soil that is slightly alkaline.
I understand a low-nitrogen formula, such as a 6-10-6, is best, as too much nitrogen can lead to rhizome rot.
Apply such a fertilizer in the fall and after flowering.
An application of a superphosphate in late February, before flowering, can be beneficial.
I also have found these bearded irises to be surprisingly drought-tolerant once established.
Give them adequate moisture, but don't overdo it, especially if the soil is slow to drain.
Q: My magnolia is dropping leaves.
What's the problem?
A: Magnolias, although called ``evergreen,'' must drop old leaves to make room for new.
Those in our neighborhood are shedding like crazy.
By late winter, magnolia leaves, having been on the tree for a growing season, often look weary.
They may be scorched, and even have fungal spots.
Then, in late April and May, the tree drops these leaves.
If your tree is replacing these with fresh, healthy leaves, don't worry.
Magnolias may also drop leaves at other times during the year.
Keep trees watered well.
The roots are especially shallow, and long, hot summers are tough.
A layer of organic mulch beneath the canopy is a good idea as it helps preserve soil moisture and keeps soil temperature down.
It also boosts the soil when it breaks down.
&QL; &QL; Mail garden questions to Kathy Huber, garden editor, Houston Chronicle, P.O.
Box 4260, Houston, Texas 77210.
The bulk of mail prevents individual replies to all unpublished letters.
&QL; &QL; XXXX END OF STORY &QL;
&QL; &UR; SALINAS, Calif.
_ &LR; Tom Jones is a hands-on farmer, not some touchy-feely type with sentimental ideas about Mother Nature and her eternal wisdom.
Yet Jones listens to his strawberry plants which, he asserts, change every day.
You get in trouble when you interfere with their natural cycle and try to make the plants do what &LR; you &LR; want, he says.
At the same time, the co-owner of Windward Farming Co.
in Salinas explains that he loves strawberry growing because it is not a totally mechanized process but one that allows for much creativity.
In his case, that creativity includes an increasing emphasis on organic farming.
Fresno native Jones, 37, came up through the farming ranks.
At 16, he was picking melons in Arizona.
After that he worked as a trucker and an irrigator, among other jobs, eventually ending up in the Salinas Valley strawberry fields in 1982.
``I got hooked on strawberries,'' he says with a laugh.
He is also hooked on the valley with its ideal growing conditions created by rich soil and a relatively cool, moderate climate.
Several years ago, he and two partners converted eight of their approximately 125 acres of strawberries to organic, and the results were everything they could have hoped for.
The berries taste and look great, and there is increasing demand for them.
Windward had been moving toward less reliance on chemicals for at least 10 years, reducing pesticide use by as much as 80 percent, Jones says: ``Then we started thinking, if we can control pests organically, why not go all the way?
(Using fish emulsion and other non-chemical fertilizers)''.
Windward Farming now has 22 acres of organic berries and more acreage in transition.
It takes three years to convert from conventional to certified organic status, and therein lies a problem.
Jones and partners, like many small- to medium-size agricultural enterprises in the area, lease their land, typically on a two-year basis.
To go through the conversion process and make it worthwhile, ``we really need six- to eight-years leases,'' he asserts.
At the same time, he understands why such leases aren't offered.
The land, for the most part, is not owned by large companies but by families with long ties to the area.
The land is so valuable that they just cannot tie it up in long-term leases, he admits.
At the same time, that value is a certain guarantee against encroaching development.
``Last time farmland was for sale here,'' Jones reports somewhat incredulously, ``it went for $30,000 an acre''.
Jones' advocacy of organic methods is both philosophical and practical.
So-called trap crops _ flowers, alfalfa _ planted alongside cash crops attract beneficial insects and simultaneously take care of such nasty critters as the lygus bug, a small insect that winters in the hills and comes down to the valley in spring.
The lygus injects a poisonous substance into the seeds on the skin of strawberries, causing the seeds to die and making for misshapen berries.
However, given a flavor choice of strawberry or alfalfa, the lygus will go for alfalfa every time, leaving the berries unmolested and proving that organic methods not only make good sense on ecological grounds but are also cost-effective, Jones says.
What's more, organically grown berries always win in taste tests, report employees of Driscoll Strawberry Associates, the large shipper that contracts with Jones and many other growers.
(Jones also gets his patented plants from Driscoll's nurseries).
While organic growing methods are still in their infancy nationwide and account for a relatively small percentage of fruit grown in the Salinas Valley, the idea is catching on.
For growers like Jones, the popularity of organic produce means higher prices, which in turn means that field workers receive a better wage _ typically $9.80 an hour rather than the $9.35 working in conventionally cultivated fields _ guaranteeing their commitment to these environment-friendly methods.
``Our people (workers) are the real key to our success,'' says Jones, adding proudly that his company experiences a 95 percent return rate among the roughly 150 workers employed during the May-November harvest season.
During that time, 16-hour work days are common.
Jones admits ruefully that at times he's so bushed that he forgets to bring home berries for his wife and three children for days on end.
``But my wife (Ruth Anne) knows how to improve my memory,'' he admits.
Sometimes when Farmer Jones looks in his refrigerator, he finds a couple of store-bought baskets _ grown by one of his competitors.
&QL; &QL; &QL; &QL; (BEGIN OPTIONAL TRIM) &QL; &QL; &UR; TAKE A FEW SERVING TIPS FROM THE GROWER &QL; &LR; &QL; Asked his favorite way to eat strawberries, Tom Jones, who grows strawberries both by conventional and organic methods in the Salinas Valley, has a quick answer: ``Right in the field''.
The Jones family _ Tom, his wife, Ruth Anne, and their three youngsters _ never tire of taking an evening stroll and nibbling fruit still warm from the day's sun.
Twelve-year-old ``Angie is the best picker,'' her father reports.
The Jones family makes jam and Ruth Anne sometimes fixes a very adult treat: She injects berries with liqueur, then dips them in melted chocolate.
They also sweeten sliced berries to taste with brown sugar and add a few drops of balsamic vinegar.
After they macerate 10 minutes or so, spoon them over slices of pound cake dolloped with lightly sweetened whipped cream.
&LR; &QL; &LR; (END OPTIONAL TRIM) &QL; &QL; &LR; &QL; &LR; &QL; &UR; GEORGEANNE'S KITCHEN: Lip-Smacking Ideas for Fresh Strawberries &LR; &UR; &QL; &LR; &UR; &QL; &LR; &UR; By Georgeanne Brennan &QL; &LR; &UR; c.
1999 The San Francisco Chronicle &QL; &LR; &UR; &QL; &LR; &UR; SAN FRANCISCO _ &LR; Here are some ways to use the best of the local crop of fresh strawberries now in our markets.
&LR; &QL; &UR; Strawberry and Rhubarb Puff Pastry Tart.
&LR; Thaw frozen puff pastry.
Slice about 6 rhubarb stalks into 1/2-inch-thick slices and cook them in enough water to cover, along with some brown sugar, a little lemon juice and a split vanilla bean, until they are soft but still hold their shape.
Drain and chill, reserving the juice.
When chilled, mix the rhubarb with 2 cups strawberries (halved if large, whole if small).
Add about 1/4 cup flour and 1/2 cup brown sugar; mix well.
Roll out the pastry and put it on a baking sheet.
Heap the fruit mixture in the center; then fold pastry up around the fruit, leaving an open space about 4 inches in diameter.
Dot this with butter and bake in a 375 oven about 30 minutes, or until the pastry is puffed and golden.
While the tart is cooking, reduce the reserved juices to just a few tablespoons.
To serve, dust the tart with powdered sugar, cut into wedges and drizzle with the reserved juice.
&LR; &QL; &UR; Fresh Strawberry Ice Cream.
&LR; Wash and hull 2 pints of strawberries; then mash them together with 1/2 cup sugar and let them stand for an hour.
Combine 2 cups heavy whipping cream and 2 cups milk in a saucepan; add 3/4 cup sugar and a split vanilla bean.
Cook and stir over medium heat until the sugar dissolves but the mixture is not boiling.
Whisk together 4 to 5 egg yolks in a bowl; then whisk in about 1 cup of the hot milk mixture.
Slowly pour this into the saucepan.
Continue to whisk until the mixture thickens, about 5 minutes.
Do not boil.
Remove the vanilla bean and stir in the mashed strawberries.
Freeze in an ice cream maker according to manufacturer's directions.
&LR; &QL; &UR; Strawberry-Chocolate Shortcake &LR;. Hull and thinly slice strawberries.
Stir in a little sugar, and refrigerate at least an hour and up to 8.
Make a favorite shortcake recipe.
Cut the warm shortcakes in half.
Top each half with strawberries.
Melt semisweet chocolate in the top of a double boiler over warm (not boiling) water.
Drizzle chocolate over the shortcakes; then top with dollops of lightly sweetened whipped cream.
&LR; &QL; &UR; Strawberry Trifle.
&LR; In a trifle or other footed glass bowl, make a solid layer of 1/2-inch-thick slices of pound cake or ladyfingers.
Drizzle with a little kirsch.
Top with a 1/2-inch-thick layer of softened strawberry ice cream, then add a scattering of sliced strawberries.
Repeat the layers twice more.
Cover the top with whipped cream; then decorate with clusters of sliced strawberries and a dusting of toasted almonds.
&LR; &QL; &UR; Strawberries in Red Wine with Rosemary.
&LR; Hull strawberries, leaving small ones whole and cutting larger ones in half.
Cover with a light red wine, such as a Beaujolais, and add a little sugar and about 1/4 teaspoon minced rosemary.
Cover and refrigerate for 6 to 8 hours or overnight.
Spoon into bowls, adding some of the juices, and serve with cookies for dipping.
&LR; &QL; &LR; Georgeanne Brennan, a food and garden writer who lives in Yolo County, is the author of ``Aperitif'' and ``The Food and Flavors of Haute Provence''.
She can be reached by e-mail at &LR; food &LR; sfgate.com &LR; .
Viburnums Under Attack Q.
In my Western New York garden I used native viburnums, partly because they are supposed to be more pest resistant.
Now, I find that my arrowwood and cranberry bush viburnums are being attacked by something.
The leaves look more like lace tatting, and underneath some of them I am finding small larvae.
If native shrubs are supposed to be more pest resistant, why are they being attacked?
Is there something I can do about it?
A. Native shrubs and trees are normally better adapted to the resident pests as well as to the climate, but the viburnum leaf beetle (Pyrrhalta viburni) is a stranger who has come to dinner.
Originally European, the beetle was first discovered in Ontario in 1947, and has now migrated to 27 Western and Central counties of New York, as well as Maine.
The larvae skeletonize leaves in May and June, starting from the bottom of the plant and working their way up, and the adults finish up any leftovers from July to October.
Eggs are laid in slits on the underside of the tips of young branches in nice, straight lines that appear as dark brown bumps.
And that's the key to their control.
Prune and remove any branch tips that have eggs laid in them, any time from mid-October, when the adults finish depositing them, to early May, when the larvae hatch.
Left untreated, heavy infestations can kill vulnerable viburnums in two or three years through repeated defoliation.
Plants too large to prune can be treated chemically.
Call your local county cooperative extension for the name of a control product labeled for use against the viburnum leaf beetle.
Most vulnerable to the beetle are arrowwood (Viburnum dentatum), European cranberry bush (V.
opulus), American cranberry bush (V.
trilobum) and, to a lesser degree, Sargent viburnum (V.
sargentii), and their cultivars.
Hybrids and cultivars of Viburnum x burkwoodii, V.
carlesii, V.
x juddii and V.
rhytidophyllum resist the beetle.
Raking vs.
Mulching Q.
We've been using a mulching lawn mower regularly for several years now.
When leaves start to drop in fall, we mulch and leave them in place as well.
We cut once or twice a week.
Our lawn is one of the better looking and healthier ones in the neighborhood.
However, we can't convince any of our neighbors that they should stop picking up grass clippings and spending hours removing leaves in the fall.
Why do the majority of homeowners insist on the removal of grass clippings and leaves from their lawns?
That is, are there big risks associated with mulching?
A. Don't brag about your lawn; it just sets the neighbors to dumping more fertilizer on theirs.
Just mention that according to studies done at Michigan State University, the nutritive value of mulching and leaving grass clippings saves 20 to 25 percent of the fertilizer one would ordinarily use.
And then talk about how improved your golf game is since you have been spending more time with a club and less with a rake.
And if they start talking about thatch buildup, inform them that a three-year Cornell University experiment found no difference in thatch thickness or quality of turf between areas where 6 inches of fallen leaves, both oak and maple, were shredded by a mulching mower and left on the grass, and areas where the leaves were raked off.
Thatch is the dead, dying and decaying organic matter, mostly old turf stems, that accumulates in a layer just above the soil.
But weekends can't be all golf.
You either have to rake or run the leaves over with a mulching mower.
You can't just leave them there because they'll block the light and eventually kill the grass, along with your neighborhood reputation.
Address questions to Garden Q&AMP;A, The New York Times, 229 W.
43rd St.
, New York 10036, or by e-mail to gardening(at)nytimes.com.
Those of general interest will be published.
Unpublished questions cannot be answered individually.
VALLEY VILLAGE, Calif.
--Shaken like salt from their paper cartons, ladybugs tumbled into the trees Tuesday above suburban Valley Village Park in the San Fernando Valley to do battle with a menacing pest.
Workers with the Los Angeles parks department carefully dropped 2 million ladybugs into the park's eucalyptus trees in hope the red-shelled beetles will eat strange Australian plant lice attacking the trees.
Park officials and entomologists don't know whether the plan will work.
The invading red gum lerp psyllid, which drains the juice from eucalyptus trees, is a newcomer to America, and experts don't yet know the best way to fight it.
But Kevin Regan, chief arborist for the parks department, said the ladybugs are worth a try.
They already have been seen eating psyllids in the park, and Regan would rather give them a shot at beating back the infestation than immediately resort to pesticides.
``If this doesn't work, we've lost nothing,'' said Regan, as helmeted workers atop cherry pickers shook $1,700 worth of ladybugs into the trees.
``We got to try using some kind of biological control first''.
If they gobble up the invaders, Regan will start dropping ladybugs into more city recreation areas, probably starting with heavily infested Griffith Park.
``Really, just about everywhere you go, you'll find them,'' he said.
The tiny psyllid first appeared in America last year and already has spread through much of California.
Los Angeles County agriculture officials spotted three infested trees just across Interstate 10 from their El Monte office in June.
The pest showed up in the Bay Area at virtually the same time and has now hit the San Gabriel Valley and Orange County, said Rosser Garrison, an entomologist for the Los Angeles County agricultural agency.
The city's worst infestation is in a stand of 70-year-old eucalyptus surrounding a picnic area in Valley Village Park.
Young psyllids have covered the trees' sickle-shape leaves with sticky white cones, called lerps, that protect the insects as they grow.
While entomologists say the psyllids by themselves probably can't kill the trees, they can put them under stress so they are more susceptible to attack by other insects.
The thought of losing Valley Village Park's eucalyptus trees worries those who live nearby.
In late afternoons, the park is filled with couples playing with their children and residents walking their dogs.
``It's a lovely park, and people come here for the shade,'' said Paul Goolnick, who has lived in the neighborhood 10 years.
``If the trees died, that would ruin the place''.
The question is whether the ladybugs, which usually feast on aphids, will eat enough of the psyllids to make a difference.
``They're nice to have, and they may eat some of the psyllids, but I don't think you'll see a serious drop in the population,'' said Garrison.
He said further studies must be done to find out what insects attack the psyllids in their Australian home.
Steve Hazzard, president of the company that supplied the ladybugs released Tuesday, said a gardening Web site lists the specific breed of ladybugs he used as a predator of the invading psyllids.
Since ladybugs tend to fly during daylight, workers waited until late afternoon to begin placing them in the trees.
Shipped in cartons that look like pint-size ice cream containers, the red bugs had been stored in a refrigerator to simulate winter hibernation and, Hazzard hoped, make them emerge ravenous.
``They've gone from November until now without anything to eat, so now is the time,'' said Hazzard, of Organic Control, Inc.
Parks officials will monitor the bug war for the next 30 to 40 days, Regan said.
If the psyllids persist, the department might use a low-level pesticide that can be injected directly into the trees without leaving a residue.
X X X &QL;
ATTENTION EDITORS: The following photos are part of tonight's New York Times Photo Package, moving Wednesday, 10/20/99.
Photo clients will automatically receive these photos via AP's PhotoExpress or may download them from either the Wieck Photo Database in Dallas at 972-392-0888 or from NYTPhotos on Newscom at 305-448-8411.
Non-clients can make individual purchases by calling (888) 603-1036 or 212-556-4204.
(NYT42) NEW YORK --Oct.
20, 1999 --NY-METS-HONEYMOONERS, 10-20 -- The Mets' Tuesday night loss to the Atlanta Braves ruined the honeymoon plans of Brenda and Felix Manglinong, newlyweds from Sacramento, Calif.
, who had dreams of attending a World Series between the Yankees and Mets.
``I brought a rain suit, an umbrella, heavy boots and a thermos,'' Mr.
Manglinong says.
``I would have stood outside Shea Stadium as long as it took''.
(James Estrin/New York Times Photo) (NYT41) SAN JOSE, Calif.
--Oct.
20, 1999 --ADV.
FOR SUN.
, OCT.
24 --ONLINE-AUCTIONS-2-COX, 10-20 -- As Americans flock to online auctions in search of bargains, profits and fun, law enforcement officials say swindlers are collecting money from fraudulent auctions without having to worry much about getting caught.
Even Jonathan Hammar, who has been buying and selling toy cars online for more than a year, has been defrauded by people who have cashed his checks and sent him worthless cars.
(Kevin Sullivan/Cox Newspapers photo) (NYT40) SAN JOSE, Calif.
--Oct.
20, 1999 --ADV.
FOR SUN.
, OCT.
24 --ONLINE-AUCTIONS-1-COX, 10-20 -- Jonathan Hammar of San Jose has been buying and selling toy cars online for more than a year, but even he has been defrauded by people who have cashed his checks and sent him worthless cars.
``I've had one or two really bad deals,'' he says.
(Kevin Sullivan/Cox Newspapers photo) (NYT39) VERO BEACH, Fla.
--Oct.
20, 1999 --PEST-CONTROL-2-COX, 10-20 -- Solarization keeps diseases and blemishes at bay on a Vero Beach organic vegetable farm.
Experiments at the U.S.
Agricultural Research Service Horticultural Research Laboratory in Fort Pierce, Fla.
, have demonstrated that sheets of clear plastic laid over soil trap enough solar heat to kill most harmful organisms.
(Randall Smith/Agricutural Research Service photo) (NYT38) VERO BEACH, Fla.
--Oct.
20, 1999 --PEST-CONTROL-1-COX, 10-20 -- Plant pathologist Daniel O.
Chellemi, left, and Kevin O' Dare, an organic grower from Vero Beach, inspect the progress of a new soil treatment.
``I can't say enough for it,'' O'Dare says of the plastic treatment which Chellemi calls ``solarization''.
(Randall Smith/Agricutural Research Service photo) (NYT37) MARCOVIA, Honduras --Oct.
20, 1999 --MITCH-REBUILD-COX, 10-20 -- One year after Hurricane Mitch devastated Central America, life is getting better for thousands of the killer storm's victims.
Rita Galvez peers out the window of her new home in Marcovia with her son, Vicente, 9.
``I never dreamed I would have a house like this,'' she says of the tiny structure, which is the size of a typical two-car American garage.
(Mike Williams/Cox Newspapers photo) (NYT36) MACAU --Oct.
20, 1999 --ADV.
FOR SUN.
, OCT.
24 --CHINA-MACAU-COX, 10-20 -- One institution that won't change after China takes control of this 446-year-old Portugese colony Dec.
19 is the ever-present trinket peddler on the steps in front of the Jesuit College of Sao Paulo.
As the takeover approaches, almost no public dissent has arisen among the more than 400,000 Macau residents who speak Chinese as a first language.
(Joseph P.
Albright/Cox Newspapers Photo) (NYT35) WASHINGTON --Oct.
20, 1999 --INTERNEES-MEMORIAL-2, 10-20 -- Cherry Tsutsumida, the executive director of the National Japanese American Memorial Foundation, with an artist's rendering of the memorial.
In one of the great domestic tragedies of World War II, 120,000 Japanese-Americans were denied due process and trucked off by federal agents after Japan attacked Pearl Harbor, solely because of their Japanese ancestry.
Memories of the harsh world of the interned Japanese-Americans of World War II will soon have a focus in a memorial near the Capitol.
(Justin Lane/New York Times Photo) (NYT34) NEW YORK --Oct.
20, 1999 --BBN-METS-2, 10-20 -- Edgardo Alfonzo, left, and Rey Ordonez clean out their lockers at Shea Stadium on Wednesday, a day after losing the National League Championship Series to the Atlanta Braves.
The Mets will be remembered not for failing to become the first team to overcome a 3-0 postseason deficit, but for their spellbinding twists and turns, their collapses and their comebacks.
(Vic Delucia/New York Times Photo) (NYT33) NEW YORK --Oct.
20, 1999 --BBN-METS-1, 10-20 -- New York Mets manager Bobby Valentine in his office at Shea Stadium on Wednesday, a day after his team lost the National League Championship Series to the Atlanta Braves.
The Mets will be remembered not for failing to become the first team to overcome a 3-0 postseason deficit, but for their spellbinding twists and turns, their collapses and their comebacks.
(Vic Delucia/New York Times Photo) (NYT32) STAMFORD, Conn.
--Oct.
20, 1999 --SINGLES-HOUSING-3, 10-20 -- Lois Slocum, left, with Michelle Arvan, Nancy Ligi, and Jessica Slocum, runs a family-style Handyman Hardware.
In the suburbs, where the handyman has disappeared from under the sink, often heading for greener pastures as a contractor, women are picking up the slack.
``Can't get a small-job person anymore,'' says Mrs.
Slocum, 62.
(Rebecca Cooney/New York Times Photo) (NYT31) NEW YORK --Oct.
20, 1999 --SINGLES-HOUSING-2, 10-20 -- Melissa Roth, in chair, at Bonnie Burkert's apartment.
They furnish their apartments to please themselves, not future mates.
Thanks to delayed marriages, profitable careers, higher divorce rates and longer lives, the number of women living alone has doubled in the past 20 years, to 28 million, according to the Census Bureau.
(Jeffery A.
Salter/New York Times Photo) (NYT30) CLIFTON, N.J. --Oct.
20, 1999 --SINGLES-HOUSING-1, 10-20 -- Denise Ramos, handy at home, buys porch trim at a Home Depot in Clifton.
In the home-improvement arena, the weekend warrior is a she, taking on small fix-its that once fell to the now-vanishing handyman.
Nearly 57 percent of single women now own their own homes, throwing cold dishwater on the accepted wisdom that homes are the exclusive territory of couples with children.
(Rebecca Cooney/New York Times Photo) LITE (NYT29) NEW YORK --Oct.
20, 1999 --MUSEUM-SUIT, 10-20 -- ``Bacchante,'' a marble statue sculpted in 1894 by Frederik William MacMonnies, on display at the Brooklyn Museum near a sign advertising the museum's controversial exhibit, ``Sensation''.
City Hall's lawsuit against the museum over its showing of ``Sensation'' could evict the museum from the city-owned building.
If that strategy succeeds, it could have a remarkable result.
The museum, not the city, owns the artwork.
So if the museum were evicted, it could theoretically pack up all its artwork, the second largest collection in the country, after the Metropolitan Museum of Art in Manhattan, and take it them somewhere else.
(Librado Romero/New York Times) (NYT28) NEW YORK --Oct.
20, 1999 --ADV.
FOR SUN.
, OCT.
24 --TENORS-MUSIC, 10-20 -- Jose Cura, in ``Cavalleria Rusticana'' at the Met.
Tenors, for better and worse, drive us crazy.
We need a couple of big ones.
So audiences and a music business operatives are now taking a hard look at three new tenors, Roberto Alagna of Italy, Marcelo Alvarez and, most recently, Cura, both from Argentina.
(Sara Krulwich/New York Times Photo) (NYT27) NEW YORK --Oct.
20, 1999 --ADV.
FOR SUN.
, OCT.
24 --CRAVEN-FILMS, 10-20 -- Wes Craven has for a quarter century been famously producing work less known for brains and normalcy than for viscera and extremes.
``From the beginning, I had never really intended to do horror,'' says Craven, whose new movie, ``Music of the Heart,'' which opens Friday and stars Meryl Streep as a music teacher in East Harlem, has heart and grit and genuine warmth.
(Nancy Siesel/New York Times Photo) (NYT26) NEW YORK --Oct.
20, 1999 --BOOK-TALK, 10-20 -- Norman Laurilla, owner of A Different Light bookstore in Chelsea.
``Initially, gay book stores were part of a political movement of sorts,'' says Laurilla, who believes that his customers ``more than the general public, have computers at home, which take time away from reading, but when they want books they buy with quick-stop shopping on the Internet''.
(Fred R.
Conrad/New York Times Photo) (NYT25) UNDATED --Oct.
20, 1999 --HOME-IMPROVEMENT-B&AMP;W, 10-20 -- Creating an efficient home office requires planning.
Before adding an office to your home, check the local zoning laws to see if there are any restrictions for a home-based business.
Then evaluate your business operation so you can determine the amount of work space you need.
(Edward R.
Lipinski/New York Times Illustration) LITE (NYT24) NEW YORK --Oct.
20, 1999 --CARMEN-OPERA-REVIEW, 10-20 -- Maite Cebrian-Abad in the Lyons Opera Ballet production of ``Carmen''.
With a cigar-puffing heroine, excitingly portrayed by Ms.
Cebrian-Abad in Swedish choreographer Mats Ek's provocative style, and with its crowd of stage Spaniards screaming in homemade Esperanto, this ``Carmen'' is typical Ek.
(Ruby Washington/New York Times Photo) (NYT23) ENCINO, Calif.
--Oct.
20, 1999 --CIR-LEE-COMICS, 10-20 -- In December, Stan Lee's website (www.stanlee.net) will introduce a new comic-style story called ``The Seventh Portal,'' Lee's first new series since assuming the publisher's seat at Marvel in 1972.
``The idea is that there are seven portals that lead to other dimensions,'' Lee, 76, explains.
``Mongorr has conquered the other six; the seventh leads to earth.
It's up to these heroes to keep him from finding it''.
(Kim Kulish/New York Times Photo) (NYT22) SAN DIEGO --Oct.
20, 1999 --CIR-GAMES-RACE, 10-20 -- Some characters in the Ready 2 Rumble boxing game were modeled on people who worked on the game at Midway.
As a result of a series of rapid developments, both technological and sociological, minorities are being represented in more and more computer games as fully realized characters.
But such characters are also raising sticky issues in the real world about the nature of racial identity.
(Robert Burroughs/New York Times Photo) LITE (NYT21) SADDLEBROOK, N.J. --Oct.
20, 1999 --CIR-VOICE-CHAT, 10-20 -- Residents of Saddlebrook can use voice chat to talk to Len Azzarone and other police officers.
In the last six months, hundreds of thousands of people have downloaded some version of voice chat software.
Instead of typing messages back and forth, people are talking into their computers and hearing the spoken responses of others from around the world.
(Keith Meyers/New York Times Photo) (NYT20) ARMENIA, Colombia --Oct.
20, 1999 --CIR-EARTHQUAKES, 10-20 -- A man and child sit in front of a demolished building following a January earthquake in Armenia.
Major earthquakes aren't occurring more frequently now than they have in the past.
It just seems that way, given the recent earthquakes in Turkey, Greece, Taiwan and Mexico.
(Chang W.
Lee/New York Times Photo) (NYT19) ROCKVILLE, Md.
--Oct.
20, 1999 --INTERNEES-MEMORIAL, 10-20 -- World War II veteran Joe Ichiuji, 80, at his home last week wearing a hat bearing the name of the Japanese-American division he fought with during the war.
Ichiuji, was in the Army before Pearl Harbor but after was discharged as an ``enemy alien'' and bound for internment.
He later fought with the 442d Regimental Combat Team which was one of the most decorated front-line units of the war.
(Justin Lane/New York Times Photo) (NYT18) WASHINGTON --Oct.
20, 1999 --CLEMENCY-CONGRESS, 10-20 -- Deputy Attorney General Eric Holder, left, listens to Roger Adams, a pardon attorney for the Justice Department, during testimony before the Senate Judiciary Committee on Capitol Hill, Wednesday.
Holder and Adams defended their work in investigating jailed members of the Puerto Rican nationalist group FALN, who were released from prison recently following a controvertial pardon by President Clinton.
(Justin Lane/New York Times Photo) (NYT17) WASHINGTON --Oct.
20, 1999 --KENNEDY-AWARDS, 10-20 -- Comedian Jonathan Winters during an interview on Wednesday.
Winters, who came to Washington to receive the Mark Twain Prize for humor from the Kennedy Center for Performing Arts, warmed up for the event this afternoon with a discussion in which it was difficult to separate the serious from his improvisational wit.
(Stephen Crowley/New York Times Photo) (NYT16) WASHGTON --Oct.
20, 1999 --CLINTON-AMERICORPS, 10-20 -- President and Mrs.
Clinton during a ceremony marking the fifth anniversary of Americorps at the White House on Wednesday.
At left is Trampas Stucker, who teaches reading and math to poor, rural school children, who was honored with an award for his services.
Seated from left are: President Clinton, Mrs.
Clinton, Andre Crisp, Sargent Shriver, Gov.
Mike Leavitt of Utah, Colin Powell (partly obscured), Harris Wofford and Elie Siegal.
(Paul Hosefros/New York Times Photo) (NYT15) WASHINGTON --Oct.
20, 1999 --HOLBROOKE-LOBBY, 10-20 -- U.S.
Ambassador to the United Nations Richard Holbrooke, left, talks with Assistant Secretary of State for Legislative Affairs Barbara Larkin in between meetings on Capitol Hill, Wednesday.
Holbrooke was lobbying members of Congress for the U.S. to pay its dues to the world body.
(Justin Lane/New York Times Photo) (NYT14) NEW YORK --Oct.
20, 1999 --ADV.
FOR SUN.
, OCT.
24 --DAME-EDNA-THEATER, 10-20 -- Barry Humphries starring as Dame Edna Everage in ``Dame Edna: The Royal Tour,'' at the Booth Theater.
Americans have had the opportunity to see Dame Edna before, but only on Broadway can she receive the kind of legitimate attention a megastar has every right to expect.
(Sara Krulwich/New York Times Photo) (NYT13) SUMMIT, N.J. --Oct.
20, 1999 --ADV.
FOR SUN.
, OCT.
24 --EAST-RIVER-PIPE-MUSIC, 10-20 -- F.M.
Cornog in his home studio in Summit.
His hermetic guitar-pop compositions - recorded and released under the moniker East River Pipe - are the equivalent of private music.
More and more these days, independent rock musicians are shunning the prestige and expense of recording studios in favor of the affordability and intimacy of working at home.
(G. Paul Burnett/New York Times Photo) LITE (NYT12) JERUSALEM --Oct.
20, 1999 --ADV.
FOR SUN.
, OCT.
24 --ISRAEL-MUSEUM-2, 10-20 -- Jacques Lipchitz's sculpture ``Mother and Child'' in the Billy Rose Art Garden of the Israel Museum in Jerusalem.
In less than four decades, the museum has evolved from an improbable fantasy into a world-class institution whose collection now consists of some 500,000 objects - roughly five times that of the National Gallery of Art in Washington.
(Rina Castelnuovo/New York Times Photo) (NYT11) JERUSALEM --Oct.
20, 1999 --ADV.
FOR SUN.
, OCT.
24 --ISRAEL-MUSEUM-1, 10-20 -- James S.
Snyder, standing, the director of the Israel Museum, and its founder, Teddy Kollek, the former mayor of Jerusalem.
I felt that a new country needed a new art museum,'' Kollek says, recalling the museum's chaotic origins.
Before he even had a building, he went around asking every art collector he knew if they had a masterpiece or two to spare.
(Rina Castelnuovo/New York Times Photo) (NYT10) JERUSALEM --Oct.
20, 1999 --ADV.
FOR SUN.
, OCT.
24 --SOBEL-ISRAEL-THEATER, 10-20 -- The Israeli sculptor Dani Karavan in the desert along the Egyptian border with his new sculpture ``Path To Peace,'' comprised of one hundred columns with inscriptions in one hundred languages of the word ``peace''.
The Parisians expressed initial concern over the politically-charged ``Peace Sukkah,'' his contribution to a current exhibit on the Champs-Elysees.
(Rina Castelnuovo/New York Times Photo) (NYT9) WASHINGTON --Oct.
20, 1999 --CONGRESS-SPEND, 10-20 -- Majority Whip Tom Delay, R-Texas, left, and Rep.
J.C. Watts, R-Okla.
, stand next to a prop during a news conference on the current budget negotiations with the White House on Wednesday.
In recent weeks, Republicans have made leaving Social Security surpluses alone a major goal of their budget fight with President Clinton.
The president has agreed, though at one point he also proposed using the surpluses if Republicans would also agree to do so.
(Justin Lane/New York Times Photo) (NYT8) WASHINGTON --Oct.
20, 1999 --DOLE-WITHDRAWS-2, 10-20 -- Supporters of Elizabeth Dole, including Bonnie McElveen-Hunter, her campaign finance director, look on as Mrs.
Dole announced her withdrwal from the presidential race on Wednesday.
Mrs. Dole, the only woman in the 2000 presidential campaign, dropped out of the Republican race saying her lack of money made it futile to continue to run.
(Stephen Crowley/New York Times Photo) (NYT7) WASHINGTON --Oct.
20, 1999 --DOLE-WITHDRAWS, 10-20 -- Elizabeth Dole turns to her husband, former Sen.
Bob Dole, during her speech where she announced her withdrawal from the presidential race on Wednesday.
Mrs. Dole, the only woman in the 2000 presidential campaign, dropped out of the Republican race Wednesday saying her lack of money made it futile to continue to run.
(Stephen Crowley/New York Times Photo) LITE (NYT6) CAMBRIDGE, Mass.
--Oct.
20, 1999 --INCUBATE-INTERNET-BOS, 10-20 -- Timothy Rowe, left, and Andrew Olmsted, second from left, of the Cambridge Incubator, flank Drs.
Robert Adelman and Elizabeth Quattrocki Knight, who plan to start an internet company next month.
The Cambridge Incubator is a community concept of hatching Internet companies in a single space.
It is becoming part of a trend in business incubators that began with idealab of Pasadena, Calif.
, which has helped launch two-dozen on-line companies in barely two years.
(Wendy Maeda/Boston Globe Photo) (NYT5) BOSTON --Oct.
20, 1999 --LAWYER-PROFILE-BOS, 10-20 -- William Lee of the law firm of Hale and Dorr.
Lee says he got into the law profession partly because he was drawn to the actin of the courtroom.
(David Ryan/Boston Globe Photo) (NYT4) BOSTON --Oct.
20, 1999 --COLLEGES-SECURITY-BOS, 10-20 -- Connie and Howard Clery outside the Student Union at Boston University earlier this week.
The Clery's daughter was found dead in her dorm room in 1986 at Lehigh University.
She had been raped, sodomized, beaten, and strangled.
On Tuesday night, Mrs.
Clery received the Heinz Family Foundation Rose Achievement Award given annually to a woman survivor of violence for her work in achieving an end to such violence.
(Dominic Chavez/Boston Globe Photo) (NYT3) SHELBYVILLE, Texas --Oct.
20, 1999 --ADOPTIONS-TEXAS-2-HNS, 10-20 -- The Rev.
W.C. Martin and his wife, Donna, started an adoption trend in Shelbyville County in East Texas when they adopted two children.
They are also planning to adopt two foster children.
In the past 14 months, 39 children, mostly from Houston, have relocated to Shelbyville County.
From left are LaDonna, 12, Mercedes, 7, and Tyler Martin, 4; foster children Joshua Simpson, 6, and Terri O'Toole, 10; and Princeton Martin, 18, back row.
Princeton and LaDonna are the Martins' birth children.
Behind them are other families in Shelbyville who have adopted children.
(Steve Campbell/Houston Chronicle Photo) (NYT2) SHELBYVILLE, Texas --Oct.
20, 1999 --ADOPTIONS-TEXAS-1-HNS, 10-20 -- At Wednesday night Bible study at Bennett Chapel Missionary Baptist Church, Johnnie Brown reads the Bible to her husband, Fred, and their new children, 3-year-old triplets, Tevin, Terrance and Tiayana, and 2-year-old Keithosha.
``You start looking at what all these kids are going through and you think, 'Maybe I can help,''' says Fred Brown.
The Browns also have four grown children.
(Steve Campbell/Houston Chronicle Photo) (NYT1) PISCATAWAY, N.J. --Oct 20, 1999 -- NET-SAVVY-EXECS, 10-29 -- Emmanuel A.
Kampouris, chief executive of the American Standard Co.
, in a tub from his company's Renaissance Classic collection.
American Standard recently began selling to distributors on the Web, and Kampouris had told recruiters to put ``conversant with the Internet'' up there with integrity and leadership as major qualifications for the person who will fill his job when he retires next year.
(Norman Y Lono/New York Times Photo) LITE The New York Times News Service
LONDON _ Exchanging their confines for a temporary stay in the open country air, seven prisoners from Her Majesty's Prison Leyhill in the Cotswolds won their second gold medal last week at the Hampton Court Palace Flower Show, the Royal Horticultural Society's summer extravaganza.
Their show garden, ``Take a Walk on the Wild Side,'' included a woodland garden of wildflowers and grasses under linden and beech trees, with a stream flowing under a stone bridge.
``It is one thing to make a garden, and another to mimic nature,'' Adrian Foulkes, a prisoner, said of the difficulty of forcing bluebells and wild garlic into bloom.
Foulkes, who is 39 and is nearing parole on a life sentence for murder, heads the prison's garden committee this year.
The flower show, which ended last weekend, is an annual event on the grounds of Hampton Court Palace, in the London borough of Richmond-Upon-Thames, on the Thames River.
The show, which attracts horticultural groups and garden designers, uses displays that are designed so that visitors can walk through them.
The prisoners' exhibit, situated on the banks of a long canal with spouting fountains, seemed like a real woodland in which one could rest on a willow seat under linden trees.
The Hampton Court prize also honored the prisoners' vegetable garden display: a kitchen garden (carrots, onions, parsnips and runner beans) enclosed by cordoned apple and pear trees and a rusty fence overgrown with blackberry bushes from the prison's grounds.
The kitchen and woodland gardens were designed by Gareth Goundrill _ not a prisoner, but the 18-year-old son of Jeff Goundrill, who oversees business enterprises at Leyhill.
The younger Goundrill made the designs as his final exam for a high school technology course, and the prisoners dug the grounds and planted the flowers, vegetables and trees with the help of the prison farm foreman, Martin Brookes.
Leyhill, a minimum-security institution, has been participating in Royal Horticultural Society flower shows at Hampton Court Palace and Chelsea since 1991.
``It is a real pleasure to work with the Leyhill team,'' said Stephen Bennett, the director of the shows.
``They have become good friends; they provide much pleasure to the gardening public, and their skillful use of plants _ all grown at the prison _ makes a valuable contribution to horticulture and the community''.
Leyhill is in the town of Wotton-Under-Edge in the Cotswolds, one of England's best-known garden belts, about 100 miles west of London.
The institution, on about 250 acres, with three acres under glass, is surrounded by crumbling stone walls.
``In order to work as a gardener,'' said Tom Williams, the prison's warden, ``a prisoner needs no horticultural experience.
But he must be quick to learn, work hard and have a sense of humor under pressure''.
Leyhill's grounds include an arboretum with more than 1,000 specimen trees and a stately home, Tortworth Court, a 60-room mansion that was built in 1853 and is the former seat of the Earls of Ducie.
Henry John, the third earl, created the arboretum from 1853 to 1921.
The arboretum has been managed by Leyhill since the prison acquired it in the 1940s.
Leyhill also maintains pasture land for raising rare Gloucester cattle and runs a museum of old farm machinery in the prison's Tortworth Visitors' Center, which also includes a farm stand.
The arboretum is open to the public on weekends and bank holidays from 9 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.
The visitors' center is open the same hours daily.
Information: 011-44-1454-260-681.
The prison's gardens have become a serious moneymaking enterprise over the last five years.
This year, Leyhill has supplied a million carpet-bedding plants to nearby towns, and it distributes organically grown vegetables to 27 other prisons.
``If a prison serves a bad meal, it sours the whole atmosphere,'' said Colin Lennox, the farm manager.
And the prison takes the word ``organic'' seriously.
Pests are controlled by their natural predators instead of by sprays and pesticides.
A computer monitors the prison's nine greenhouses along with irrigation and fertilization.
There's an additional enterprise for the Leyhill gardens: They provide organic salads and sandwich fillings for British Airways Concorde flights originating at Heathrow Airport.
For all the efficiency of the prison's garden operation, there is one drawback: As Jeff Goundrill said, ``The best gardeners are always being released.''
One of the best things to happen to salads in decades is that zippy Italian green called arugula.
It's literally a weed in Italy, and it would grow just as easily in anybody's garden if not for one tiny problem: the flea beetle.
Flea beetles are minuscule black insects that appear early in the spring and spend the rest of the season leaping among the plants, chewing holes in leaves.
They hop like fleas, hence the common name.
If there are enough of them, they can nibble seedlings to the ground.
Actually, there are several species of flea beetles.
Some prefer nightshade family plants like eggplant and tomatoes, and some prefer cabbage family plants like broccoli and arugula.
In my garden, the cabbage-eaters are more numerous, and they adore arugula.
If I sow arugula seeds in early spring, to take advantage of the cool weather they like, I have to swathe the spot in one of those diaphanous row covers immediately, before the seeds germinate.
If I don't, the flea beetles will chomp the seedlings into oblivion the moment the first leaves peek above the surface.
Even so, the flea beetles know the arugula is there.
They alight on the protective cover, patiently waiting for me to lift it to snag a bunch of arugula, so they can sneak in and start munching.
I imagine saliva dripping from their little jaws.
It is no comfort to know that this pest is an accidental import, like the European corn borer, the Japanese beetle and the gypsy moth.
Flea beetles are thought to have arrived in North America in the early 1900s, probably from Europe or Asia.
They got off the boat in British Columbia and made their way steadily eastward.
The North American countryside is rich in cabbage family weeds like yellow rocket and winter cress, and the flea beetles flourished.
The tiny terrorists arrived in the Northeast in the 1950s and have spent the last half-century establishing themselves as garden pests, as if anyone needed more of those.
Several mild winters in a row have made the problem even worse by allowing more flea beetles to survive.
What's a gardener to do?
At a conference in New Haven this winter, research scientists and organic farmers pondered the perplexing problem of Phyllotreta cruciferae, the cabbage-crunching flea beetle, as well as its nightshade-noshing cousins.
Not much research has been done on the agile insects, because they are not a big problem for conventional vegetable growers.
(Pesticides applied to kill other insects tend to keep flea beetles in check).
For organic growers and most backyard gardeners, though, they are tough to control.
Like other beetles, they are hard-bodied.
They also bound away at the slightest disturbance.
Those characteristics put them out of reach of most botanical pesticides and even the chemicals commonly available for home use, because the pesticide has to touch the insects to kill them.
Aside from keeping the beetles' favorite foods under cover, farmers reported trying _ with limited success _ to repel them with garlic and hot pepper sprays, planting cabbage family crops among aromatic herbs and vacuuming the insects off their crops with leaf blowers adapted to work in reverse.
Some tried to snare the flea beetles on sticky traps: pieces of white or yellow poster board taped to bamboo sticks and coated with a gooey product called Tangle-Trap.
Flea beetles are attracted to white and yellow, and they paste themselves to the traps in numbers.
Kimberly Stoner, an entomologist at the Connecticut Agricultural Experiment Station in New Haven, tried baiting sticky traps with mustard oil, the substance that cabbage-loving flea beetles home in on when they're looking for their favorite snack plants.
The baited traps worked, perhaps too well.
``I suspect that they attract many more beetles than they trap,'' she said.
Those tempted to try this at home should be warned that concentrated mustard oil can make eyes water and burn skin.
Repellent sprays, traps and covers are usually enough to keep flea beetles from doing fatal damage to crops like broccoli, turnips and rutabagas, but nothing can keep them from making unattractive holes in leafy greens like arugula and mizuna, a mild Japanese mustard that's also splendid in salads.
For now, there is only one solution to the flea beetle problem: grow the most vulnerable crops in the fall.
Flea beetles run roughshod over the garden until autumn, when they stop reproducing and start looking for a cozy place to spend the winter _ in the soil, fallen leaves or a grassy spot.
From September until hard freeze, the arugula is pristine.
What do Italians do about flea beetles in the arugula?
Nothing. The beetles aren't considered a big problem in Europe, suggesting that they made it to North America unaccompanied by the natural predators that keep them in check in their native lands.
A European study found that up to 90 percent of wintering flea beetles of the arugula-munching variety had been killed by beneficial nematodes, tiny soil-dwelling worms.
BEIJING, June 18 (Xinhua) --Vegetables produced in suburban Beijing have higher hygienic standards than before, thanks to the use of biological preparation in pest control.
A survey by Beijing Municipal Agricultural Bureau on nine varieties of vegetables, including tomatoes, cucumbers and cabbage, shows that no organic chlorine or phosphorus are found on their leaves, and the residue of mercury, cadmium and other heavy metals all are lower than the state-set standard.
To protect the environment, Beijing forbid the use of organic chlorine and other organic chemical elements in pest control in the 1980s.
Farmers were encouraged to use biological preparation instead of pesticide to prevent vegetable and plant diseases.
Trichogrammas have been widely used to prevent corn borers in suburban Beijing since the early 1970s.
The city also set up factories to breed trichogrammas in the counties of Miyun and Shunyi.
Trichogrammas have also been used to kill bollworms, defoliators and other plant pests.
To protect drinking water quality in this Chinese capital, industrial plants for producing biological preparation have been established in Miyun, Tongxian and Changping counties in suburban Beijing.
At present, biological preparation has been used for the prevention and cure of more than 30 kinds of vegetable and plant pests and diseases.
The pest control is carried out on an area of over 33,000 hectares annually, and saves 15 tons of chemical pesticide.
Bugs. A lot of people see them and respond with the bottom of their shoe.
John Howard Garrett, a local gardening expert on all things organic, sees them as a positive byproduct of a chemical-free way of life.
In Garrett's eyes, very few bugs are bad, most are beneficial, and several, wasps for example, are downright gorgeous.
Garrett, who tends to vault onto his soapbox at every chance, teamed with Malcolm Beck, a like-minded soul, to write the definitive work on regional insects, the ``Texas Bug Book'' (University of Texas Press, $24.95, soft cover).
The book is a hit.
Bugs, it seems, are much more attractive than ``Plants of the Metroplex,'' another Garrett tome.
``This book is outselling my others,'' he says.
``It appeals to groups I never even considered.
Children are fascinated by it''.
While the subject may be off-putting to some, those who open the cover are almost immediately captivated.
Most folks haven't spent much time looking at bugs since their roller-skating, scabby-knee days.
This book takes readers back to the time when a stick and a bug meant hours of summertime entertainment.
The authors beguile their readers with homey stories about their bug observations, satisfy the scholarly with all the scientific names and descriptions, and tempt the bookstore browser with a multitude of photographs.
A useful appendix lists beneficial insects, the reason they make the good-guy list and their preferred habitat.
Garrett includes his basic organic program and some of his most-requested organic recipes.
The road to publication was rough for Beck and Garrett.
The way was littered with the objections of several doctorate-wielding entomologists who kept the presses from running for three years.
``The general philosophy of the book is: If you have healthy soil, plants can resist diseases and insects as well.
Some entomologists don't believe plants have an immune system.
We do,'' Garrett says.
Writing the book changed some of Garrett's notions about what were acceptable gardening methods.
``I have completely changed my recommendations on pesticides,'' he says.
``I don't like the organic pesticides any more than the chemical ones.
They kill beneficials.
So Malcolm and I have switched over to biological things or use repellents.
Garlic, for example, is a systemic, it's a cleansing kind of thing, and it works as a repellent, too.
``It becomes more and more apparent, if you understand how it works, that we need all these bugs.
Nature is in balance.
We are the ones who have created the imbalance''.
He concludes: ``We have to stimulate life, we've got to stop killing and we have to stop trying to dominate the systems.
By eliminating the chemical pesticides and fertilizers, we'll see better results and more bugs.
But that's a good sign''.
(Visit the Star-Telegram's online services on the World Wide Web: www.star-telegram.com) &QL;.MDRV/ nn
&UR; &QL; &LR; &UR; SAN FRANCISCO _ &LR; In this time of eye-popping technology where kitchen appliances talk to you and the electronic map in your car chides you for being such a navigational nerd, it is almost refreshing to hear an unbelievably low-tech way of grape farming.
Almost, because the principles of biodynamics, a sort of ``beyond organics'' implies some far-out ideas and practices that modern folks have long since dismissed as archaic and backward.
Farming by the movement of the planets and the moon, burying a steer horn packed with manure in the vineyard and spraying vines with crystals, may sound like weird science but it swayed Jim Fetzer.
He's selling his 100 percent biodynamically-grown grapes to Fox Creek Winery for the first commercial biodynamic wines.
Fetzer, a member of the Mendocino Fetzer wine family, was once a traditional California wine-grape grower leaning toward organics.
He now owns Ceago Vinegarden vineyard in Mendocino County, a certified biodynamic vineyard.
Fetzer looked at the evidence of farming the biodynamic way and how the program replenishes the earth, and was impressed.
He found soils that had become sterile from too many chemicals could be brought back to health and produce high quality grapes.
``You can smell the difference in the soil,'' Fetzer says.
``Pick up a handful of dirt from any vineyard and it doesn't have a smell.
The soil in my biodynamic vineyard is aromatic and rich, with hints of anise and natural elements''.
Although biodynamics is a complex system based on theories developed in the 1920s by Austrian scientist and philosopher Rudolf Steiner, many of the practical applications are simple.
Biodynamics does not use chemically synthesized fertilizers, pesticides, fungicides, fumigants, hormones, antibiotics or growth regulators.
Crop fertility is centered around compost manures, green ground covers and crop rotation.
Weeds and pests are controlled by a balanced farm ecosystem.
Fox Brook Winery is owned by Rutherford Benchmarks Group and housed in the old Fetzer winery in Redwood Valley, Mendocino.
Winemaker Greg Graziano has taken the biodynamically-grown grapes from Ceago Vinegarden and produced two exciting wines.
While organic wines in general have met with less than enthusiastic reviews and sales, these biodynamic wines may turn things around.
Fox Brook 1998 Ceago Vinegarden Mendocino Chardonnay ($29) is a lovely wine with floral and green apple aromas, crisp acidity, citrus accents and subtle oak notes.
Some of the 1997 Fox Brook Chardonnay may still be in the market; the wine benefits from the extra year in bottle and is more complex with mineral notes.
Fox Brook 1997 Ceago Vinegarden Mendocino Merlot ($39) is a concentrated rich wine with deep black cherry and spice flavors, excellent balance and a long finish.
The wine is bright and packed with flavor and balanced with nicely integrated tannins.
If you've been avoiding Merlot because it lacks personality, try this one.
&LR; sh &LR; Green Business Organic grape growing and biodynamics represent a strong commitment to pro-environment farming, but protecting the environment goes beyond farming.
Recently, the Sonoma County Board of Supervisors awarded Green Business Certificates to Davis Bynum, Benziger, Asti, Chateau Souverain, Kendall Jackson-Vinwood Cellars and Trentadue for ecologically friendly business practices.
&QL; BEGIN OPTIONAL TRIM &QL; &QL; &UR; A Corking Good Year &LR; One of the myths that seems to circulate around the wine industry every year or two is a shortage of high quality natural cork for wine stoppers.
Jochen Michalski, president of Cork Supply USA, says not to worry.
``Winemakers can look forward to a stable supply of high quality corks as a result of another good year for the cork harvest,'' he says.
The 1999 harvest from Portugal and Spain, the two main cork suppliers, is slightly lower than last year's but both countries have had outstanding cork harvests the three previous years.
The string of good cork harvests also means that prices for wine corks should not increase.
Although the cork is a small part of the overall cost of a bottle of wine, anything that helps to keep the cost down is good news.
&UR; Riesling Reprieve &LR; For years, a growing number of wine writers and concerned wine drinkers have come out against the use of foreign names and terms, like Champagne and Chablis, on U.S. wines, and most have been eliminated.
One, however _ Johannisberg Riesling _ seems to have more lives than Morris the cat.
The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms has issued a ruling allowing the use of the term ``Johannisberg Riesling'' on American wine labels for seven more years.
Johannisberg is a German place-name and, like Champagne, doesn't belong on American wines.
What's wrong with just plain old ``Riesling?''
SANTA ROSA, Calif.
_ In the quest for great grapes, some growers along the northern California coast, including the wine industry leaders Michael Topolos and Michael Benziger, are embracing age-old peasant farming methods and performing rituals such as burying cow horns and spreading crystals in their vineyards.
``I did this on a leap of faith.
I don't even pretend to understand all this stuff, but I'm committed because I've seen the results in my vineyards,'' said Topolos, co-owner of Topolos at Russian River Vineyards near Forestville.
He said yields have increased and grape quality has improved.
Topolos and Benziger, both practical businessmen prominent in the wine industry, are among the practitioners of biodynamic agriculture, a system of raising crops that uses methods as old as farming itself along with some New Age spirituality.
Simply stated, biodynamics is an organic farming system that doesn't employ pesticides, herbicides or synthetic fertilizers.
Instead, it relies on manure, crop rotations, biological pest control and cosmic forces to put life back into soils and the ecology surrounding the vineyard.
It works with nature and involves astronomy and homeopathy.
``If nothing else, biodynamic farming is helping to clean up the chemical disaster caused by pesticides and fertilizers that came with the industrialization of agriculture following World War II,'' Topolos said.
``We can't continue to poison our way through''.
Some scientists dismiss biodynamic farming as junk science and question its impact on grape quality.
``This kind of thing is used more as a marketing tool to sell wine,'' said Dr.
Roland Meyer, a soil science specialist with the University of California, Davis.
``Chances are biodynamic farming would have little or no effect on the flavor of the grape or the quality of wine''.
Biodynamics is so mystical and far-fetched, he said, that it's not even considered for further research at UC Davis.
It's estimated that biodynamic farming methods are used on 1,000 of the 100,000 acres of vineyards on the northern California coast.
The percentage is small but with names like Topolos, Benziger and Fetzer involved, this kind of farming is considered more than a fringe movement.
``The North Coast is the hot spot for biodynamic farming in California,'' said Chuck Beedy, executive director of the San Francisco-based Biodynamic Farming and Gardening Association.
The approach also is gaining momentum in France, he said, where dozens of wine estates have adopted biodynamic farming methods.
Thirty vineyards, orchards and vegetable farms are certified biodynamic in Northern California, Beedy said.
Nationwide, he said, 50 growers have earned biodynamic certification.
Biodynamic farming was developed in the 1920s by Austrian-born philosopher and spiritual leader Rudolph Steiner, who came up with a system of composting and special preparations that remains the foundation of the biodynamic farming movement.
Benziger, president of Benziger Family Winery in Glen Ellen, said he was drawn to biodynamics because of the promise that wine grapes will attain superior flavors _ flavors that reflect the vineyard site, a term the French call terroir.
Pesticides and herbicides kill natural organisms that give grapes an originality specific to the site, he said, an individuality that cannot be copied anywhere else in the world.
Before adopting biodynamics two years ago, Benziger had weaned his vineyards from toxic chemicals.
``The goal is to produce a wine that is one of a kind, a wine that has sense of place and a uniqueness that cannot be duplicated,'' Benziger said.
Other winemakers believe great wines can be made without using biodynamic principles.
``Biodynamics may be good for the soil and environment, but is it going to make a better wine''? asked Mike Gulyash, winegrower at Glen Ellen's B.R.
Cohn Winery, which has won accolades and awards for its ultra-premium wines.
``Biodynamics is not a bare-bones requirement to make a great wine''.
(STORY CAN END HERE.
OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS).
Biodynamics remains very much an alternative approach to grape growing because it rejects so much of what mainstream viticulture encourages _ chemical pesticides, synthetic fertilizers and routine disking, which disrupts the ecosystem on the vineyard floor.
``Biodynamics is giving up control over the vines.
The hardest thing with biodynamic farming is not jumping on the tractor and spraying when you see a problem,'' Benziger said.
What raises eyebrows among scientists and conventional growers is biodynamics' strange practices, such as applying herbal potions by the phases of the moon, spraying microscopic crystals and burying cow dung in a female cow horn.
Greg Willis, the biodynamics consultant at Topolos vineyards, said the buried horns, crystals and moon calendar that are part and parcel of biodynamic farming make the approach difficult for some growers to embrace.
He suggests that farmers get out of their boxes and try something new.
``We can argue all day about putting a horn in the ground, but we know it works,'' said Willis, owner of a Napa-based consulting business called Agri-Synthesis.
Interest in biodynamics is growing, Beedy said.
``We are hearing from people that organic farming didn't answer all the questions they had.
They had questions about the unseen quality of life and how to work with the forces of nature,'' he said.
Alan York, a biodynamics expert, manages the vineyards at Jim Fetzer's Ceago Vinegarden.
He is also advising the Benziger Family Winery as it makes the transition to biodynamics.
Topolos, who before adopting biodynamic farming principles three years ago had farmed his vineyards organically for the 10 years, said biodynamics heals the negative effects of farm chemicals by helping the soil to regenerate its original energy so the vines can fend off insects and diseases.
Believing in the tenets of biodynamics and natural forces _ ``some that we understand and some that we don't'' _ is key to its success, he said.
The most mystical preparation is made by packing a cow horn with manure and then burying it a foot deep during the fall solstice.
It's dug up in the spring.
The manure ferments into a sweet-smelling humus-like material _ Topolos calls it black magic _ that is mixed in water and sprayed onto the land.
Topolos agrees that biodynamics requires growers to forget almost everything they have learned and to adopt a new way of thinking.
As both an organic and biodynamic farmer, Topolos said there is some overlap between the two, but that there are real differences.
He said organic farming is more passive.
``Organic farming is not doing things,'' Topolos said.
``Biodynamics is quite the opposite.
Not only do we do things, we have to do them on a schedule based on a lunar calendar''.
(The Press Democrat in Santa Rosa, Calif.
, is part of the New York Times Regional Newspaper Group.)
BOSTON (AP) --Who knew sex could be such a powerful weapon against hungry cranberry-eating pests?
A new pest-fighting weapon interferes with the moths' mating rituals, resulting in fewer of the dreaded Sparganothis fruitworm.
``Moths are going to have to take lots of cold showers,'' said Jeffrey LaFleur, executive director of the Cape Cod Cranberry Growers' Association.
With 14,400 acres of bogs, Massachusetts is the second-largest producer of cranberries in the nation, producing 1.8 million barrels a season.
Wisconsin produces 2.5 million barrels.
The fruitworms can be devastating to a cranberry crop, infesting and destroying up to 50 percent of a bog in a bad year.
They burrow into the fruit, munching their way from one to the next, rendering the cranberry useless as food or drink.
The latest antiworm device uses the insect's own pheromones, which control sexual desire, to lead the bug astray.
Moths mate around this time of year, producing eggs that turn into the worms that feast on cranberries between late summer and early autumn.
Scientists were able to replicate the pheromones released by the female moths to attract males for mating.
The pheromones have been bottled in liquid form, for all practical reasons an insect perfume.
The liquid is then mixed into a cranberry bog's irrigation system, sending the moths into a blind sexual tizzy.
The males smell the females, but because the scent is everywhere, they can't find the potential partners (unless, of course, they are fortunate enough to bump into one).
The result: fewer eggs are laid, and that translates into fewer of the berry-eating worms, said LaFleur, who sounds positively gleeful as he discusses the insect's demise.
Where the pheromones leave off, the worms' predators --such as wasps -- take over.
LaFleur predicts the fruitworm could disappear from Massachusetts cranberry bogs over several years.
This season, a handful of growers are testing out the pheromone on several hundred acres of Massachusetts bogs.
The product is nontoxic to other species and to humans, said LaFleur, whose organization represents about 80 percent of the cranberry growers in the state.
----- HAYS, Kan.
(AP) --A smaller wheat crop in northwest Kansas, combined with dismal prices, means trouble for many farmers here who were hit hard by hail before the harvest began.
And even in southwest Kansas, where the harvest was more bountiful, many farmers are opting to sell at low prices rather than store their crops.
At Garden City, the Johnson Co-op is already full and piling grain on the ground --with corn harvest expected in just 60 days.
The elevator has been shipping grain for storage to terminals in Kansas City, said grain accountant Jerry Popejoy.
Farmers have already sold 25 percent of their grain at the Johnson Co-op, he said.
The Scott Co-op in Scott City has also seen heavy selling, with farmers there selling 20 percent of their harvest rather than store it in hopes that prices will improve.
Junior Strecker, general manager of the Scott Co-op, said farmers are selling so much because of loan deficiency payments.
There are no incentives to hold the grain.
TECATE, Mexico _ Enrique Ceballos is showing two visitors through the organic gardens at Rancho La Puerta, a spa here on the Baja peninsula just across the border from California.
As he talks, he picks his supper.
``See the holes in the Swiss chard''? he asked.
``People don't normally buy it because of the holes.
I prefer to eat the holes than the chemicals''.
Then he makes a little joke: ``If you are lucky, you get extra protein from the bugs''.
In fact, there are very few blemishes on the rows of chard and lettuce, spinach and cabbage, even though chemicals are never sprayed in this three-acre garden.
Ceballos' work is guided by one principle: ``In nature, all is in balance, and if you kill part of that balance it damages the environment''.
He also applies that belief in cultivating the olive and fruit trees at the resort, and in tending its beehives.
In summer, 90 percent to 95 percent of the fruits and vegetables served to Rancho La Puerta's 150 guests have been grown by Ceballos and his staff; in the winter, the proportion drops to 50 percent.
Ceballos, 44, a biologist from Tecate with a master's degree in ecology from the National Autonomous University of Mexico, intended to be a wildlife manager.
But 14 years ago he was persuaded to work at the ranch by Sarah Livia Brightwood, the daughter of its founders.
She wanted to restore the organic garden her father had planted 50 years earlier.
``If you talk about healthy living at the ranch, you should be eating healthy food,'' she said.
The garden had lain fallow for 25 years, abandoned when a nematode problem overwhelmed the crops.
The worms were still there when work began, but new strategies have been developed for dealing with them.
For example, a crop of a species of marigold that is a nematode suppressor was planted.
The marigolds did their job so well that other crops could be planted near them.
The area of heaviest nematode infestation is now planted with fruit trees that are resistant to them, and with herbs and flowers the pests aren't interested in.
Being an organic farmer requires sensitivity, creativity and observation to decide what is planted, and when, where and how; to know such things as which weeds should be left and which pulled, and what companion planting accomplishes.
Following are some lessons learned from a stroll in Ceballos' garden.
_ Flowers are essential in a vegetable garden because they attract beneficial insects like praying mantises and ladybugs, which eat aphids.
_ Basil and tomatoes are planted together because the herb repels worms that love the fruit.
_ Plants in the onion family, like chives or garlic, are planted with broccoli and cabbage because the alliums discourage aphids from feasting on the cruciferous vegetables.
_ Plants are placed close to one another, to conserve water.
Cabbage is planted with lettuce, which matures first; after the lettuce is picked the cabbage fills in the spaces.
_ Spinach that grows in the wild is transplanted to beds of cultivated spinach; the wild spinach is more resistant to bugs and gives the cultivated spinach more of a chance.
_ In a form of crop rotation, celery is planted after tomatoes because tomatoes take a lot of nitrogen from the soil and celery needs very little.
_ Weeds that are not too aggressive are allowed because their roots help retain moisture in the soil.
Ceballos plans to make herbal teas from the new herb garden, and soon there will be eggs from the organic chickens that have just arrived.
He also makes about 300 gallons of cold-pressed, unfiltered olive oil from trees in the garden.
``This farming is a low-tech activity,'' he said.
``It depends so much on the senses, knowing the cycles of the moon, the soil''.
Many spa guests spend part of their stay weeding and planting.
``Some people who live in apartments never have had the opportunity to feel soil,'' Ceballos said.
``They ask me about the trees carrots grow on.''
WASHINGTON _ When a critical farm chemical is banned by the Environmental Protection Agency, vegetable farmers in South Georgia and Florida may have a simple way to rid the soil of plant diseases and weed seeds _ by cooking them.
Experiments at the U.S.
Agricultural Research Service Horticultural Research Laboratory in Fort Pierce, Fla.
, have demonstrated that sheets of clear plastic laid over the soil trap enough solar heat to kill most of the harmful organisms.
For years farmers have used methyl bromide to destroy weed seed, plant diseases and nematodes, the microscopic worms responsible for billions of dollars in crops losses, in the soil.
However, the chemical is known to destroy ozone when it evaporates from the soil and floats to the stratosphere.
As a result, the Environmental Protection Agency has announced it will ban its use in 2005.
Daniel O.
Chellemi, an ARS plant pathologist at the Ft.
Pierce laboratory, has shown that the plastic traps heat in the soil in a greenhouse effect.
Employed for at least six weeks during the summer, the system can kill off weed seeds and diseases that would otherwise wreck a winter crop, Chellemi said.
The system has its limitations.
For example, it cannot be used for spring crops because the plastic must lie on the soil for at least six weeks prior to planting, and in the winter before spring crops are planted there is insufficient heat for the system to work.
In 1998, Chellemi applied the treatment to four commercial farms in Florida.
On three of the farms, yields on solarized fields ranged from 96 to 123 percent of those from methyl bromide-treated fields.
A comparison was not possible on the fourth farm, operated by Vero Beach organic grower Kevin O'Dare, because O'Dare does not use methyl bromide or any other chemicals.
``I can't say enough for it,'' O'Dare says of the plastic treatment, which Chellemi calls ``solarization''.
The weed purple nutsedge was close to taking over the 10 acres of O'Dare's Osceola Organic Farm when he turned to solarization.
After two years, he said, ``our production was up 30 percent, our labor was down 75 percent, and our profits were up 100 percent''.
The solar sheets are not a perfect replacement for methyl bromide, notes University of Florida horticulture professor Steve Olson, who has collaborated with Chellemi.
For example, it is not particularly effective against the nematode that causes ``root knot,'' he said.
These worms burrow into plant roots, and intercept nutrients moving up to the plants stems and leaves.
Olson has worked with tomato growers Dale and Greg Murray of Decatur County, Ga.
, on a solarization approach that also use small amounts of approved chemical to destroy the nematodes.
ENDIT Story Filed By Cox Newspapers For Use By Clients of the New York Times News Service
WASHINGTON, Va.
_ Sunrise at Sunnyside Farms is greeted by a ritual that startles the uninitiated.
Workers advance upon windowless structures on wheels that are scattered around the 539 acres and lower the sides, releasing thousands of clucking chickens eager for a good day's work at what they do best: eating bugs.
David Cole, venture capitalist, philanthropist and organic farmer, uses these coops on wheels _ chicken mobile units, they're called _ to move his chickens where the pecking is needed most.
The mobile units are just one of many labor-savers he employs on the organic farm he started in 1995 in the middle of Rappahannock County, home to the very rich who have made their money elsewhere and to farmers who barely make a living.
Like the cattle, sheep and goats that keep the pasture trimmed, the chickens take care of fertilizing it.
Like every aspect of his $11.5 million farm, the mobile units are state-of-the-art equipment intended to ensure the success of his experimental farm.
Money is no object, and money is not the only objective.
The farm is not a rich man's hobby.
It is a rich man's business, and Cole, who made his name as president of Internet services at America Online (and his money in a variety of other computer technology businesses), predicts confidently that Sunnyside will turn a profit by 2004.
In addition to its wagonloads of chickens, the farm has 424 head of Wagyu cattle (close relatives of the famous Japanese Kobe beef); 60 to 70 varieties of vegetables, herbs and flowers; and 8 to 10 varieties of berries, as well as pear, apple and cherry trees.
It is experimenting with more than 200 kinds of fruits and vegetables.
But even more important to Cole is Sunnyside's role in promoting organic farming as economic savior.
By helping local growers profit in an era when independent farms are struggling, he hopes to create a model for reviving depressed agricultural areas around the country.
The idea of saving a region through organic farming might once have sounded outlandish.
But the demand for organic food nationwide is greater than the supply, and sales have increased by at least 20 percent annually for several years.
Buyers looking for such food _ independently certified to be free of chemical pesticides, genetically engineered ingredients and antibiotics _ willingly pay a premium for it.
Cole, 47, calls his system network farming: a large central farm is the hub, with smaller nearby farms the spokes, their production marketed through the hub.
Sunnyside's system is designed to show that diversified organic farming, with a mix of vegetables, fruits and animals, can be profitable while protecting the environment, not only from tract housing but also from the damage done to it by traditional farming methods.
Such a system would be particularly useful in helping small organic farmers compete.
The concept is not new.
Walnut Acres Organic Farms in Pennsylvania, which Cole just bought, operates in the same fashion.
But Sunnyside was set up to be an experimental demonstration farm.
``What he is doing is really rare,'' said Katherine DiMatteo, executive director of the Organic Trade Association.
``That he has the ability to have this diversity on his farm makes it unique.
It totally encompasses the breadth of on-farm innovation and research.
He is really taking new and old ideas and combining all that information into a full farm approach''.
So far three small farms have signed on with Sunnyside, and conversations with a dozen more farmers are under way.
The farm pays to educate them in converting to organic techniques and gaining organic certification and gives them access to the expensive equipment needed to run an organic farm.
It also pays them 20 to 30 percent more than they would get if they were selling conventional food and, more important, gets their products to consumers.
``A weakness of a lot of farmers is marketing,'' said Brian Cramer, the gardener and orchard production manager at Sunnyside.
Selling at farmers' markets or farm stands, with no middlemen, ``is always preferable,'' he said, ``but some farmers don't want to do it''.
``Some don't have time to do it,'' he said, ``so they leave it to someone else, and they get taken advantage of''.
nn In the summer Sunnyside is opening a market in an 1835 building Cole is restoring in the center of the tiny town of Washington, Va.
, less than a block from his most prestigious customer, the Inn at Little Washington.
Its farmers' products will be sold there, at a farmers' market in Washington, D.C., and to restaurants, the Fresh Fields natural supermarket chain and an organic wholesaler who sells up and down the East Coast.
There will be more than 30 varieties of tomatoes, 15 different peppers and three dozen kinds of greens.
``Eventually we could have 8 or 10 spoke farms, and that could have a tremendous economic impact on the community,'' said Cole, who has restored the 1720 house on the farm, one of several places he lives with his wife of 30 years and the youngest of their four children.
(One son works for Sunnyside full time, another during the summer).
The original 1,000-acre farm had been in the same family for 276 years.
When Cole bought half of it, in 1995, the land had been worn out by conventional farming.
It took two years of intensive working and enriching the soil for the first earthworms to return, and Sunnyside was certified organic in 1999.
DiMatteo, of the Organic Trade Association, said she doubts that aylne has ever started an organic farm from scratch on so grand a scale, and while she greatly admires what Cole is trying to do, she is not certain it will succeed.
``People either go into organic farming gradually or specialize in one crop while they figure out crop rotations,'' she said.
``Wealthy people do organic farming, but profitability is not what it's about, and he's setting a goal of a working farm that is economically feasible.
``This is the food industry.
It's not like the technology industry.
You can't force nature to perform according to some bottom-line expectations''.
John Burns, a consultant who was hired by Cole in 1995 but left after a falling-out two years later, agreed.
``When there is such an excess amount of capital around,'' he said, ``the solution seems to be spend more money, get more people and get more equipment, as opposed to scaling back and concentrating on fewer things.
It's the mentality of his other enterprises: you get enough brain power and enough people and you can get it solved, and farming isn't that way.
It's the cycle of life and nature; it's not microchip speed''.
Cole, though, maintains that with enough money and his successful business experience he can help nature along.
For instance, his recent purchase of Walnut Acres, the oldest organic food mail order company in the country, provides Sunnyside with built-in marketing advantages.
He has also scoured the country for the best people in organic production, like Wes Beall, a cow's version of the horse whisperer: cattle trust him.
To assure a steady supply of loyal farmworkers, who are recruited from two villages in Mexico, Cole provides benefits including trips home for two or three months at a time and 401(k) plans, matching the workers' contributions.
Cole has also planted several varieties of dwarf fruit stock to see which grow best.
These varieties, Cramer said, bear more fruit more quickly, and are easier to pick and to spray with organic pest controls.
Many are heirloom varieties like Roxbury Russet and Grimes Golden apples and newer varieties like Liberty that are immune to a serious apple disease called scab.
Sunnyside has its own weather station.
It alerts the orchardist when to expect an outbreak of pests and prepare for it.
For example, it can pinpoint the moment when the Japanese beetle's larvae are about to emerge.
While the commercial grower is bringing out the pesticides, Cole is sending out the chickens.
The farm uses animals in an intensive grazing rotation, a technique now being reintroduced into organic agriculture.
``In order to save human labor we enlist animal labor,'' Cole said, ``by having them do what they do naturally''.
For a day or two cattle graze on high grasses in a particular field; when they move on, the sheep and goats come in for a day to eat everything else.
They are followed by the chickens, which scatter the manure left behind by the other animals as they eat the weed seeds out of it, at the same time depositing their own nitrogen-rich manure.
(The chickens also provide eggs for the farm to sell).
Then the rotation begins again.
All of these approaches will be shared at the Sunnyside Institute, to be built on the farm.
It will provide information not available from federal and state agriculture agencies, which have spent little time or money studying organic farming.
``No one has ever coordinated all this information,'' DiMatteo said.
Cole traces his interest in the environment to his childhood in Hawaii.
His family has financed global conservation efforts for 15 years, most recently through the Cole Family Foundation.
He chose Virginia for his experiment because of its climate and its proximity to one of his homes.
He found the farm through his friend and now neighbor, John Sawhill, president and chief executive of the environmental group the Nature Conservancy.
In an interview for ``Dream Makers,'' by Michele Hunt (Davies-Black Publishing, 1998), Cole said entrepreneurs need to redefine capital to include not only money but the earth itself and stop treating it like an unlimited resource.
``Instead of saying the world is going to hell in a handbasket, you have to say we can do something about this.
We can change our relationship to the earth''.
Like any rich mogul who comes to town and buys up all the available land, Cole has his detractors.
But even those who have parted ways over differences of opinion admire what he is trying to do.
Burns, who quit as a consultant, said Cole is ``brilliant''.
But he added: ``He makes it hard for some people to deal with him, because you have to do it his way.
He wants to do too much too fast.
If I'd had my druthers, I would have managed the farm for three years without growing a thing, but he wanted to have crops in 18 months''.
In early April, Cole was invited to lecture at the Royal Institute of International Affairs in London on organic food trends in the United States.
In his speech he described his attempt to fuse two totally different cultures: the high-powered, fast-paced world of technology and marketing and a slow-paced place from the past where success is based on the production yields of organic farming.
Cole leaves no doubt of his certitude that he can apply the principles of the Internet, where rewards can come at warp speed and most problems can be remedied with brain power and capital, to farming, where even the best-laid plans are subject to the vagaries of nature.
``He wants to do good, and he really sees this as an important step,'' Burns said.
``And being a leader in a previous industrial incarnation, he wants to do the same thing in the organic world.
But organic mogul may be an oxymoron.''
BUFFALO, N.Y.
(AP) - For the first 15 years of their farming lives, Gail and Mike Thorpe of East Aurora relied on a conventional arsenal of pesticides and fertilizers to grow their fields of fruits and vegetables.
But for the last three years, the couple has scrapped chemicals in favor of things like tricho gamma wasps, green lace wings, bars of soap, live bacteria, and lots of weeding.
The Thorpes have gone organic.
''It's been like learning to farm all over again,'' said Gail Thorpe.
''But it has been worth it.
We feel really good about what's coming out of our fields''.
This past week that feeling was backed by an official designation of their accomplishments.
The Thorpes passed a final inspection by the Northeastern Organic Farming Association/New York Chapter, and have the right to claim 896 acres of their farm as ''certified organic''.
These local farmers are part of a growing national trend of organic farming, joining more than 6,000 other growers of everything from fruits and vegetables to animal feeds and food-grade soy beans.
Nationally, the organic head count is up 20 percent in two years.
In New York, more than 230 growers have earned official organic status, with another 50 or so expected to pass muster this growing season.
Although less than 2 percent of all food produced in the U.S. is certified organic, annual sales now total more than $6 billion said Sarah Johnston, executive director of the New York branch of the organic farming association.
''Our farmers are still the little guys, but we're seeing a steady growth trend as consumer demand grows and producer awareness increases,'' she said.
By definition, organic farming eschews artificial fertilizers and pesticides, instead harnessing the power of natural substances, such as compost, bacteria and pest-targeted insects and protective netting, to build healthy soil and keep invading forces at bay.
While any farmer can opt to use these methods, those who want to label the fruits of their labors as ''certified organic,'' are required to go through a three-year process that includes extensive documentation.
While the ranks of organic farmers are steadily increasing, it's still considered an oddity.
Steve Porter, in his 11th year of organic growing, is the state's largest organic vegetable producer.
He said he continues to be scrutinized by non-organic neighbors.
''We're still considered the weird ones,'' Porter said of the Elba farm he runs with his father, Jack, and brother, Bill.
''A lot of them scratch their heads, but a few are getting interested in how this works''.
While other farmers were writing checks for annual applications of herbicides, pesticides and fertilizers, the Porters have faced higher upfront costs on soil preparation, including equipment, organic substances and labor.
''The costs probably work out to be comparable, but they're paying and applying chemicals several times a year, every year, while our biggest costs are up front,'' Porter said.
Over the past decade, the Porters have seen their organic business bloom from a one-acre vegetable patch to more than 500 acres of produce.
The goods find their way to the table via Wegmans and Tops supermarkets, health food stores, food cooperatives, natural foods wholesalers, and the farm's own Community Supported Agriculture program.
Through the CSA program, participants pay up front for a season's worth of produce, and receive weekly installments of fruits and vegetables from early summer through early winter.
More than 160 families in the Buffalo and Rochester areas are currently paying about $200 each for the steady supply of organically-grown goods.
The Porters also produce organic grains sold to organic dairy farmers as feed, and raise food-grade organic soy beans to ship around the world for tofu production.
While declining to discuss profits, Porter said he hasn't had to ''run to the bank to borrow money''.
''You don't go into farming to get rich,'' he said.
''We're holding our own financially, expanding our acreage and finding new markets, so I guess we're a success.''
WASHINGTON (AP) --First, parents clamored for the hormone secretin in hopes it would help their autistic children.
Put to the test, however, secretin is proving disappointing.
Now a new theory is triggering desperate parents' interest --and this time the stakes are higher because it could spur misuse of the nation's most precious antibiotic, vancomycin.
An Illinois mother persuaded scientists to try a bizarre-sounding experiment, testing whether vancomycin might help her son's severe autism.
To their surprise, little Andrew Bolte got better.
Dr. Richard Sandler of Rush Children's Hospital in Chicago was skeptical of Ellen Bolte's theory that a neurotoxin-producing intestinal infection was behind some of her son's symptoms.
He administered the antibiotic anyway.
Andrew ''was not cured, but all of a sudden he started saying words, became toilet-trained,'' Sandler recalled.
''I found that very intriguing.
It's not supposed to happen''.
So Sandler treated 11 autistic children who, like about a third of children with this serious brain disorder, also suffer painful gastrointestinal problems.
Neuropsychological testing concluded that 10 children improved, he reports in this month's Journal of Child Neurology --but only for a while.
And that's the problem: Andrew and the others worsened again after just a few months.
Yet already parents are calling doctors about vancomycin.
That's worrisome because overuse of vancomycin, considered the best weapon against the problem of antibiotic-resistant infections, will spur germs to become impervious to it.
''It is a danger,'' said Sandler, who has quit using vancomycin, calling it inappropriate until more research proves if it is a real clue or a false lead.
Another Chicagoan, Dr.
Michael Chez, plans to compare vancomycin to a dummy drug this fall, important because simple attention during medical research markedly helps autistic children, the so-called ''placebo effect''.
(Send an e-mail to rushstudy@aol.com for study information).
Like other autism experts, Johns Hopkins University neurologist Dr.
Andrew Zimmerman is bracing for families' calls.
''It's heartbreaking, because you know they really want answers,'' yet the study is far too weak to back antibiotic use, he said.
Still, it's ''provocative,'' Zimmerman said, because scientists are scrutinizing whether bowel problems are caused by or worsen autistic symptoms, or are a coincidental side effect of the terrible brain disorder.
More than 400,000 Americans have autism, characterized by profound social withdrawal, inability to communicate, repetitive behavior and sometimes aggression.
No one knows what causes it, although much research suggests something goes wrong during critical fetal brain development.
Several thousand children have taken secretin, an intestinal hormone, after a mother said one dose brought her son out of autistic isolation.
But in scientific studies, secretin so far has proved no better than a dummy injection.
Intense behavior therapy is autism's only proven treatment.
But Andrew Bolte was so aggressive the therapy didn't stand a chance, his mother said.
He screamed for hours.
He even chewed drywall from the walls.
Complicating matters were severe diarrhea and other gastrointestinal problems.
Bolte blames antibiotics prescribed for fluid in Andrew's ears shortly before he became autistic at 19 months.
Her unproven theory: those drugs killed Andrew's normal gut-protective bacteria, allowing an intestinal infection that can produce nerve-killing toxins, which entered his brain.
Vancomycin, she thought, could kill that infection.
Thirty-six doctors scoffed.
After all, autism typically appears between ages 14 and 22 months, and no sufferers have ever been found with neurotoxic infections.
Sandler called it ''highly improbable,'' too, but he tried because Andrew, by now 3, was miserable.
Two months later, Andrew was ''very calm,'' allowed Bolte to hug him and finally followed verbal commands.
Aggression and other symptoms soon returned.
But Bolte believes vancomycin eased his bowel problem enough to open a window for behavior therapy, saying Andrew retained his language improvements.
Even she cautions against demanding vancomycin, however.
Instead, she is raising money for bacterial research.
----- EDITOR'S NOTE -- Lauran Neergaard covers health and medical issues for The Associated Press in Washington.
On the Net: For general autism information: http://www.cureautismnow.org
The discovery that autistic children appear to have subtle abnormalities in body movements that can be diagnosed as early as 3 months old is leading researchers to hope for new treatments.
The findings, by Philip Teitelbaum, a psychologist at the University of Florida in Gainesville, are preliminary.
But they have generated intense interest because for the first time, a method is being proposed for diagnosing the condition in babies whose brains are still developing rapidly.
Most autism is not diagnosed in children until they are at least 3 years old.
But if there were a reliable way to diagnose autism earlier, Teitelbaum and other researchers said, doctors might be able to devise therapies to alleviate or eliminate the condition, when the brain is its most malleable.
Autism is a disorder of the brain and behavior that affects about 5 of every 10,000 children.
While autistic children appear healthy, they may stare into space for hours, throw tantrums, show no interest in people and pursue repetitive activities, like head banging, with no apparent purpose.
Teitelbaum made the discovery by examining videotapes of babies who were later found to be autistic.
These infants showed a specific cluster of movement abnormalities when rolling over, sitting up, crawling and walking, Teitelbaum said in a telephone interview.
But, he cautioned, the results are still preliminary.
Researchers need to look at many more babies, he said, to see exactly which movement abnormalities can predict autism and which suggest developmental disorders like schizophrenia or attention deficit disorder.
``I think he's on to something,'' said Dr.
Dan Geschwind, a neurogeneticist at the University of California at Los Angeles and scientific adviser to Cure Autism Now, an organization based in Los Angeles run by parents of autistic children.
``He's got a very intriguing piece of preliminary data which, if it turns out to be true, will be very important''.
Temple Grandin, a highly functioning autistic woman who is an assistant professor of animal science at Colorado State University in Fort Collins and an authority on animal behavior, said: ``He's on to something really good, and I fully support it.
I like the fact that he is objectively measuring something that is biological''.
It may be, she cautioned, that Teitelbaum has discovered general problems in the nervous system that are not unique to autism.
But even that, she said, is a benefit for doctors, parents and teachers, who now have nothing to go on before children are 2 or 3 years old.
Anne Donnellan, a professor of rehabilitation psychology and special education at the University of Wisconsin at Madison, said: ``Teitelbaum's work is important because it reflects a reality about autism that has been missed.
We tend to think it's a problem with the mind.
But now that we are really beginning to see how the brain works, we know that the mind is embodied.
Body is part of mind and there's no way to separate them''.
(STORY CAN END HERE.
OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS) Teitelbaum said he got the idea of looking at autism as a movement disorder partly because of his work with brain-damaged animals.
As they recover, he said, they go through predictable stages, for example recovery of movement, that reflect fundamental aspects of brain organization.
Because human babies also pass through predictable stages of development, he theorized that defects in the brain might be reflected in early movements.
A few years ago, Teitelbaum sent out word to parents of autistic children through various national organizations that he was looking for videotapes of babies before their autism was diagnosed.
He received 17 tapes that showed the babies during major milestones of motor development, including rolling over, sitting, crawling, standing and walking.
He also videotaped 15 normal infants as they passed through the same milestones.
Portions of each tape were analyzed, using a special technique, for subtle differences in patterns of movement.
No two babies develop motor skills in exactly the same way, but the autistic babies show a specific cluster of movement abnormalities, Teitelbaum said.
Some were subtle and others quite obvious.
Normal children may temporarily show some of the same movements.
For example, none of the autistic babies in the tapes learned to roll over like normal children did, he said.
Normal babies use a corkscrew motion to go from back to stomach or vice versa.
Starting at about 3 months old, they first turn their pelvis to one side, followed by the trunk and finally the shoulders and head.
By 6 months, the order is reversed: the head goes first and the rest of the body parts follow, corkscrew fashion.
Some of the autistic babies in the tapes never learned to roll over.
Others did, but in a peculiar fashion, Teitelbaum said.
Starting from lying on their sides, they rolled to their stomachs or backs by raising heads and pelvises.
Then they threw the upper legs forward and toppled over, moving all body segments together.
And unlike healthy babies who usually learn to sit up at 6 months, even while turning the torso or head, some of the infants whose autism was diagnosed later on toppled easily, falling to one side ``like a log'' and failing to break the falls with their hands.
Teitelbaum, who described his findings in a recent issue of the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, also noted anomalies in the way the autistic babies in the tapes learned to crawl and walk.
Babies typically start to crawl at about the same time they begin to sit, holding their bodies symmetrically with arms vertical at shoulder width, palms on floor, fingers pointed forward.
Thighs are vertical and hip-width apart with knees on the ground and lower legs and feet resting on the floor pointing backward.
Weight is commonly distributed equally on all four limbs.
The autistic children in the study showed an asymmetrical lack of support in the arms or legs, Teitelbaum said.
One baby supported himself on his forearms rather than his hands.
He raised his pelvis high in the air, bird-dog fashion, but could not move forward.
Another baby crawled by scooting his left knee on the floor but used his right foot to push himself forward.
Teitelbaum said that every autistic child showed some degree of asymmetry in walking.
Many tended to shift their weight at the wrong moment, which made their walking appear slightly stiff.
Others kept their arms in a more infantile position, arms extended forward.
Interestingly, many autistic children walk more slowly and with shorter steps, like Parkinson's disease patients whose motor skills are damaged, Teitelbaum said.
Early diagnosis has long been a goal of autism researchers, who theorize that the condition results from brain abnormalities that develop before birth.
Some researchers think the glitch occurs as early as the 20th to 24th day of gestation, long before women know they are pregnant.
Others believe the injury, which could be a mutation or environmental insult, occurs later on, perhaps in the second trimester of pregnancy.
In any event, researchers say that in autistic people, most of the brain forms normally but that some basic scaffolding of nerve fibers is incomplete or improperly developed.
Because the human brain grows rapidly in the first year of life _ literally constructing circuits that will last a lifetime _ this is the best time to intervene.
The goal of intervention would be to stimulate the baby's brain to circumvent the bad wiring or develop connections to compensate for a defect, Donnellan said.
By correcting movements through some form of physical therapy, it may be possible to used feedback to help correct abnormal brain development.
When Evan Rosenberg was 2 years old, he didn't play like other children.
He spent hours gazing out the window, clapping his hands.
He didn't make eye contact with his mother.
He wasn't talking.
He couldn't point to objects, or follow basic commands.
Fearing her son couldn't hear, Wendie Rosenberg took him to an audiologist.
``The audiologist said there's nothing wrong with his hearing,'' she said.
Then he said a word that strikes a chord of panic in a parent's heart: autism.
``I thought autism meant sitting and rocking in a corner, severe mental retardation and no skills at all,'' Rosenberg said.
``I couldn't say the word `autism' for a year.
It was like falling into a black hole and not being able to get out''.
That was seven years ago.
Today, Evan rushes to the door to greet visitors.
He not only makes eye contact and talks, he's doing fourth-grade-level work in most subjects.
He still has autistic traits, including a slightly formal manner of speech, and a propensity for re-enacting conversations to himself.
But for the most part, he just blends in.
Evan, 10, is one of an exploding population of children with autism in Washington.
He also is one of the success stories, a child who functions almost independently in a normal, mainstreamed classroom after years of intensive, one-on-one therapy to draw him into the world of his peers.
Autism is a mysterious brain disorder that affects between 1 out of 500 and 1 out of 1,000 children.
Scientists cannot agree on the incidence, except to say it appears to be growing.
No one knows exactly why.
But the rise is fueling an unprecedented concern over the best way to help children with autism, as well as intensified research into possible causes and cures.
A study by the California Health and Human Services Agency this year found that the number of people with autism in California had nearly quadrupled (up 273 percent) between 1987 and 1998, a time when the population base increased 19 percent.
Other studies have put the increase as high as 500 percent or 600 percent, said Portia Iversen, founder of California-based Cure Autism Now Foundation and the parent of a 7-year-old autistic son.
In Washington, programs that take children with autism are having to turn children away.
``In 20 years, we've never had a wait list,'' said Mimi Siegel, executive director of the Kindering Center, an early-childhood development program in Bellevue.
``We have always been able to shoehorn kids in''.
Until this year.
The situation has gotten so acute that a group of 30 local families has banded together to lobby for improved services and persuaded Children's Hospital to begin a program specializing in pediatric autism.
Due to be in operation early next year, the center will be jointly run by the hospital and the University of Washington's Center on Human Development and Disability.
For parents like these, the rising caseload is chilling.
The disease impairs a child's ability to form language and relationships, and strikes at the very heart of being human _ the ability to connect with other people.
As one mother puts it, ``It's as though someone broke into my home and stole my child's mind and left his helpless body''.
Autism affects imagination, communication, social interaction and reasoning ability, creating a spectrum of impairments.
Children may develop odd ritualistic behaviors, quirky language patterns, or hypersensitivities to stimuli, such as sounds.
No two children with autism are alike.
Some develop high verbal skills, but their thinking remains concrete.
Others understand language perfectly, but remain mute.
Some children fixate on objects, such as car wheels, or develop narrowly focused obsessions, such as with weather broadcasts.
Some flap their hands.
Some bang their heads.
Some make eye contact readily.
Others seem lost in their own worlds.
Evan's success is the kind of story that parents of young children with autism dream of and pray for, give up their jobs and sometimes their life savings to achieve.
Only about half of children with autism respond to treatment as well as Evan did.
The problem: Researchers can't tell in advance which 50 percent will respond.
The refrigerator myth: First described in 1943, autism was once thought to be a disease of upper-middle-class dysfunctional families.
The myth of the ``refrigerator mother'' _ a parent who failed to attach to the child _ persisted until the late 1960s, when research began uncovering the neurological roots of the disorder.
Today, scientists have identified some patterns of brain abnormalities that may reveal the organic, biological basis for the disease.
Overall, for example, children with autism tend to have slightly bigger heads with heavier brains.
Many children with autism have anomalies in various brain structures.
Brain-damage studies and post-mortem analyses have found differences in the frontal lobes, which help plan and process complex information; the cerebellum, which is involved in motor coordination; and the limbic system, which helps regulate emotions and social behavior.
The locations of the damage help explain some of the symptoms of autism.
Scientists now believe the neural connections aren't ``wired'' the same way in damaged areas, making it impossible to deliver the right signals.
``Most social interactions require ability to process complex sets of information, such as facial expressions, body movements, language, all at once, and monitor our own role in the conversation,'' said Geraldine Dawson, professor of psychology and director of the autism project at the UW.
``The timing of it and the complexity of it is too much (for children with autism)''.
Scientists are still puzzling out how this process is interrupted.
``How does something that leaves 99 percent of the brain normal, how does it derail so many diffuse psychological functions''? said Dr.
Alan Unis, associate professor of psychiatry at the UW School of Medicine.
And even more puzzling _ how does autism occasionally result in ``savants,'' such as the character portrayed by Dustin Hoffman in the movie ``Rain Man''?
``Some children (with autism) have islets of preserved, or exceptional, ability,'' Dawson said.
These so-called ``splinter skills'' may show up as amazing feats of memory, or exceptional abilities in math, music, drawing or the ability to decode puzzles.
``It's similar to a person who is blind who has more acute hearing or ability to use touch,'' she said.
``If you're not using certain areas of the brain involved with language and people, other areas having to do with objects, space and numbers are exercised''.
Autism has sometimes been called ``mind blindness,'' an attempt to describe how difficult it is for children with autism to be able to imagine, or ``see,'' what's going on in the minds of others, an essential task for forming social relationships.
Many children with autism don't know, anticipate or react to what others are thinking.
This makes the world a confusing, unreadable, unpredictable place and contributes to the child's isolation.
Biochemical fingerprints: The UW, which has one of the largest autism research programs in the country, currently has several long-term studies under way looking at how brain structure and activity correlates with the development of autistic traits.
Using tools such as Magnetic Resonance Imaging, a way of visualizing brain tissue, researchers are working to identify the ``biochemical fingerprints'' of the disorder by identifying which areas of the brain are associated with different symptoms.
Tying these biochemical patterns and the source of the damage to specific types of behavior is a complicated task, but scientists believe it will help them develop early predictors of outcome and better treatments.
Scientists are particularly interested in correlating areas of brain abnormality with outcome of interventions, Dawson said.
It is believed there are different subtypes of autism, and the goal is to find the best form of treatment for each one.
For families, treatment is the most pressing concern.
The Rosenbergs tried many ``remedies,'' including special ``anti-yeast'' diets and vitamins from Europe.
``Families are so vulnerable,'' she said.
``We had a whole biochemical work-up, spent thousands of dollars not covered by insurance.
But for him, (diet) wasn't the answer''.
Finally, they started applied behavioral therapy, a form of intensive, highly repetitive teaching that breaks learning into tiny incremental tasks, each one reinforced with positive rewards.
Most children learn by osmosis from their environments.
Children with autism need to be taught even the simplest things, like responding to their names.
The process is strict, labor-intensive and excruciatingly time-consuming.
It can take days or weeks to learn a task as simple as pointing, years to learn language.
``We had to teach him how to nod,'' Rosenberg said.
``We had to teach him what language was for''.
At first, Evan was oblivious.
They kept at it, 20 to 25 hours a week, month after month.
``It was intense.
We lost all our privacy,'' she said.
``People were constantly in and out.
But we kept him engaged, kept him focused''.
Within three months, Evan was making eye contact, playing with blocks, pointing spontaneously to objects and forming words.
``At the beginning, people who don't know about (behavioral therapy) think we're breaking their spirit,'' Rosenberg said.
``But you'll never hear that (criticism) from parents whose children do it''.
Today, Evan continues to get 10 hours of therapy a week outside of school, and he continues to make progress, one task at a time.
This year, for example, he went to day camp without a full-time aide for the first time.
Rosenberg is heartened by his progress, and his acceptance into the world of his typical peers.
``When we first started this journey, we were advised don't ever tell anyone (your child has autism) because their expectations will drop,'' she said.
On this day, Evan and his therapist, Kim Domis, are setting out more goals, tasks and rewards in Evan's tidy upstairs bedroom.
They are working on reading comprehension as well as manners and figures of speech.
Like many children with autism, Evan understands language at a literal level, but struggles to understand its abstractions.
There's a rhythm to the therapy.
A question.
An answer.
A mark on the board.
The marks accumulate.
The minutes go by.
When he meets his goals, he gets a reward.
Every 10 minutes or so, he gets a break.
``What does it mean to find a needle in a haystack''?
Domis asks.
``It's hard to find,'' Evan says.
He seems pleased when he gets his answers right.
They move on to working story problems in math.
Occasionally, Domis throws in an unexpected question.
``What does it mean to stay on your toes''? she asks.
``Pay attention''.
Evan looks to make sure he gets a point for the correct answer.
At the break, he gets to work on a jigsaw puzzle, one of his favorite activities.
Today it's a rhinoceros puzzle, a complicated adult one with more than 1,000 pieces.
``Remember just three pieces,'' Domis says.
``Just remembering,'' he says.
``Thanks, Evan''.
``You're welcome, Kim''.
There are stacks of completed puzzles mounted on boards against the wall, each assembled a piece at a time, like the neural circuits in his brain.
The break's over, and he's back at work.
He picks up his reading-comprehension book.
``Is that a book you can judge by its cover''?
Domis asks.
Evan laughs.
``You can't judge a book by its cover,'' he says.
``Means you can't tell what's on the inside.''
NEW DELHI, October 27 (Xinhua) --There are an estimated 1.7 million autistic persons in India suffering from developmental disorder that affects communication and social abilities of people, Welfare Ministry sources said here today.
Autism is known as a "spectrum disorder," in which the severity of symptoms range from a mild learning and social disability to a severe impairment with multiple problems of highly unusual disorder.
It is stated that 20 out of a population of 10,000 in India suffer from the spectrum disorder.
Out of this, 80 percent affected by autism are boys.
The Action for Autism, a non-profit organization based here, is conducting a three-day training workshop for parents of autistic children.
According to the Action for Autism, there are no medical or genetic tests which can detect autism.
Diagnosis of autism is not easy, the onset may occur at birth, or a child may have a period of normal development followed by a deterioration of verbal and social skills around one-and-half to two-and-half years.
&UR; (Distributed by The New York Times Syndicate) &LR; &QL; Support services for people with autism _ children and adults alike _ fall far short of fulfilling their needs today, says a new study.
And the lack of specialized help contributes to the increased behavioral and social problems among autistic adults living outside their family homes, the researchers say.
People with autism, a disorder that affects brain development, tend to have trouble communicating and relating to the outside world.
More than a half-million Americans have autism or some form of pervasive developmental disorder, says the Autism Society of America.
More cases of autism are being diagnosed than ever before, in part because of changes in diagnostic criteria, says study co-author Marsha Seltzer, a professor of social work at the University of Wisconsin-Madison.
``The service system is experiencing a crunch.
In some states, families have to have to wait several years or longer to get the services they need,'' Seltzer says.
Although many people think of autism as a childhood disease, she says it's really a lifelong struggle.
``Parents just shoulder a tremendous responsibility,'' Seltzer says.
``Most research on autism is on early childhood autism, right around the time of diagnosis,'' she says.
After that, she says, ``It almost falls off the face of the research charts, but it never leaves the sphere of the family''.
Many families surveyed by Seltzer and her colleagues think their autistic children lack essential services.
Her on-going long-term study involves approximately 400 Wisconsin families who have either an adolescent or adult child with autism.
Roughly 40 percent of the autistic participants are aged 20 to 50.
David Holmes, who chairs the Autism Society of America's panel of professional advisors, echoes the sentiments of the study.
``The complexities of autism require more specialized adult services,'' Holmes says.
Autistic people need specialized services, experts say, because the disease is multifaceted, with wide-ranging symptoms, and because autistic people often have a secondary condition.
More than 80 percent of the autistic subjects, for instance, also have mental retardation, obsessive-compulsive disorder or a seizure disorder, the researchers say.
Without special help, especially for autistic adults living away from their parents, behavioral and social problems develop, say the researchers.
Because autistic people need a stimuli-controlled environment, as well as fairly constant training in communications, behavior management and task completion, Holmes says generic programs don't work _ and even can harm those with autism.
``Adult services for other forms of developmental disabilities are not often appropriate for adults with autism,'' Homes says.
But, he says, ``Adults with autism can continue to develop new skills if only given the chance''.
Seltzer and her colleagues presented their early findings last week at a meeting of the International Association for the Scientific Study of Disability in Seattle.
Funded by the National Institute on Aging, the study is a joint effort by researchers at the University of Wisconsin-Madison and Brandeis University, in Waltham, Mass.
---- (The HealthScout.com Web site is at http://www.HealthScout.com.)
The explosion in the population of children with autism has created huge demand for therapists who can provide ``Applied Behavioral Analysis'' (ABA), the only widely accepted treatment for autism.
ABA is an intensive, one-on-one form of therapy that helps ``rewire'' the brains of children with autism through repetitive teaching and positive reinforcement.
Therapists with training in ABA are in such demand they've started guarding their phone numbers to avoid disappointing parents who stand no chance of getting their services.
And special education preschool programs that offer even limited ABA services are having to put students on a waiting list for the first time.
Frustrations such as these are driving a grass-roots organization effort by parents, who are trying to improve services and options for children with autism.
They are also forcing parents to do battle with insurance companies, school districts and state agencies to try to get services to help their children.
``About 10 percent of parents in the (autism) clinic are engaged in some type of legal or adversarial interaction over their children's educational placement,'' said Dr.
Alan Unis, psychiatrist and autism expert at the University of Washington.
``It's as bad as the civil rights movement in the 1960s.
If these children don't get an appropriate education, the risk of them spending the rest of their lives in institutional placements is much higher''.
ABA is widely recognized as the treatment with the most scientific credibility for helping children with autism, said Geraldine Dawson, professor of psychology and director of the autism project at the UW.
Twenty years ago, the prognosis for children with autism wasn't good, Dawson said.
Today, if a child is identified by age 2 or 3 and given high-quality, intensive early intervention _ at least 25 hours of one-on-one therapy a week for two to three years _ about 50 percent respond really well, she said.
``They have an average IQ point increase of 28 points,'' she said.
That's enough to move a child from the mildly retarded to normal intelligence range.
But such interventions are costly and time-consuming.
``One of our concerns is the research seems to point to certain minimum number of hours (of treatment to be successful,)'' said Nellie Allnutt, social services coordinator of the Developmental Disabilities Division, King County.
``We're very concerned we won't be able to meet what's defined as best practice for these kids''.
Current funding through state and federal developmental disability resources allows only for a few hours a week for those children who qualify, she said.
Most insurance plans don't cover ABA.
Many parents want more, and they are afraid if they wait to get it, they will miss the window when their children's brains can still be reprogrammed.
Tracey Newsome is one who didn't want to wait.
Newsome's younger son Elliot, 3, was diagnosed with ``Pervasive Developmental Delay,'' one of the disorders on the autism spectrum, about eight months ago.
``At about 18 months, he wasn't doing the things we thought he should be, like pointing to stuff,'' Newsome said.
``I'd say, `Point to your eyes, point to your nose,' and he wouldn't do it''.
At first Newsome tried not to compare his progress with his older brother's, figuring all siblings are different.
``But in your heart, you know it's not just a second-kid thing,'' she said.
Newsome was one of the lucky ones.
She was able to find a therapist to begin doing behavioral therapy with Elliot.
``The ABA approach has been incredible,'' she said.
``It's like a huge light bulb going on.
``Before, it was like he didn't even know what we were saying.
He gets it now''.
Children with autism lack the necessary neural connections to learn automatically, but those connections can be established through repetition and reinforcement, Dawson said.
The technique takes advantage of the fact that the brain's circuitry is still under construction in the early years of life.
Children born with a cloudy cataract in one eye, for example, will develop normal vision if the cataract is removed before age 3.
If it's removed after age 3, they will remain blind in that eye because the neural pathways that process visual information in the brain were never stimulated.
Like muscle cells that get stronger in response to exercise, brain cells respond and adapt to stimulation from the environment.
Newsome, a former Microsoft manager, is working now to help other parents get access to behavioral therapy.
Together with several other Microsoft parents (who also have children with autism) and professionals, she has helped form Northwest Behavioral Associates, a non-profit program to provide educational and behavioral support services to children with autism.
The group, which provides therapy and school-consultation services, is also putting together a tutor-training program to increase the pool of people qualified to work with children with autism.
The group joins other established parent organizations, such as FEAT (Families for Effective Autism Treatment), which are also working to increase training, awareness and funding for autism therapy.
Other institutions are responding to increased demand for services from parents as well.
Children's Hospital, for example, is developing a new autism program in collaboration with the UW's Center on Human Development and Disability, to provide comprehensive services for children with autism.
The center, which will be directed by Dawson, will certify and train therapists.
It also will provide ABA therapy, as well as other services, including school interventions, for children with autism.
Therapists themselves are organizing.
The Northwest Association for Behavioral Analysis has formed a committee to try to bring a national certification test to Washington.
So far, five states, including Florida and California, have certification standards for behavioral therapists.
``We need to discriminate between the qualified and the unqualified,'' said Michael Fabrizio, a trained behavioral therapist in Seattle.
Certification is critical for increasing insurance coverage.
Currently, many parents can't get insurance to pay for therapy because behavioral intervention doesn't fit into conventional categories of treatment.
``It's not a medical model where you go in and get a shot,'' he said.
``And it's not a typical therapy model, like speech therapy, where you get an hour a week''.
Insurance companies blanch at the thought of paying for 20 to 40 hours a week of therapy, at an average cost of $30,000 a year, he said.
Advocates for people with autism are glad to see the increased focus on intervention in a population that can't speak for themselves.
``Because of their poor ability to communicate, (children with autism) tend to be misunderstood and pushed aside,'' said Audrey Horne, president of the Autism Society of America.
``But they are treatable and educable.''
&QL; MONUMENT (Phoenix) _ Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt today will ask President Clinton to unilaterally create four new national monuments _ two in Arizona and two in California _ that Congress has refused to protect.
By STEVE YOZWIAK.
Story will move in the ``A'' category.
AUTISM2 (Phoenix) _ Days after her first secretin injection last year, Rebecca David slept until 7:30 a.m.
It was a remarkable development for a girl who for years had been rousing her parents at 4 a.m.
Rebecca's family, along with several dozen others in the Valley, called the Southwest Autism Research Center in Phoenix with the good news: Their autistic children were sleeping better, eating better, communicating more easily.
The parents attributed the differences to secretin, a drug they hoped would help free their children from &UR; autism, a developmental disorder that has baffled researchers for 50 years.
There was only one problem: Almost all the 30 Phoenix-area children in the yearlong clinical trial of secretin reported great results _ even though a third had received a placebo.
By JODIE SNYDER.
Story will move in the ``A'' category.
BIGBOOKS (undated) Anne Stephenson's reviews of big books that make great holiday gifts.
By ANNE STEPHENSON.
Story will move in the ``E'' category.
&QL; &QL; KIDBOOKS (undated) Beverly Medlyn reviews selected children's books.
By BEV MEDLYN.
will move in the ``E'' category.
&QL; &QL;
After a long and contentious hearing in Congress Thursday, Republican and Democratic leaders in the House Government Reform committee, who agreed on little else, agreed to ask the Department of Health and Human Services to set up an extensive, impartial study of whether vaccination may cause a small number of causes of autism.
The agreement came after arguments among witnesses and sparring between leaders of the House Government Reform Committee, in which the hearing was held.
The hearing was called by Chairman Dan Burton, R-Ind.
, whose granddaughter has autism, and who believes she may have got it from a vaccine _ even though current research has not found any connection between getting vaccines for measles, mumps and rubella, and the onset of the brain disorder, autism.
Rep. Henry Waxman of California, the ranking minority leader on the committee, prodded witnesses and complained to Burton that the hearing was unfairly stacked to show a connection.
He said that while getting the science right was important, in this case getting parents to mistrust vaccines would certainly lead to deaths from diseases society has mostly beaten.
Mainstream medical organizations and leaders in the field of immunization agree that there is no convincing evidence for the theory that the vaccine called MMR _ measles, mumps and rubella _ causes autism, a brain disorder characterized by an inability to socialize and a tendency to engage in constantly repeated actions or comments.
The leading proponent of the idea that MMR vaccine may cause some cases of autism is Dr.
Andrew Wakefield of the Royal Free and University College Medical School in London.
He said he took his cue from parents whose experience of autism seemed to be different than the usual.
The disease is suspected in most cases of being genetic, and it appears gradually in the first two years of life as a failure to speak, the beginning of repetitive motions, and a withdrawal from social interaction.
But the parents Wakefield dealt with said it came on rather suddenly, over a period of months, and often just after vaccination with the triple vaccine.
The signature symptoms, he reports, are bowel pain, inflammation and erratic bowel habits, in children who also begin to show the usual mental symptoms of autism.
Wakefield has published studies on a dozen such cases, and will soon publish reports on another 60.
He said there is some suggestive laboratory work, as well, but the chief message he said was: ``Here is something we need to study''.
On the opposite side, apart from the skepticism of most of the medical community, is Dr.
Brent Taylor, a senior colleague of Wakefield at the same London Medical School.
Taylor has done the largest and best-controlled study to date on the subject, of 498 autistic children in London.
He found no relation between the children's vaccination dates and the onset of their disease.
The disease is usually diagnosed when retarded development shows up in the first two years of life; vaccination usually is done at about 16 months of age; Parents and doctors noticing the two coming together could be coincidental, he suggests.
Burton said that whatever the case with most autism, ``We owe it to our children and grandchildren to ensure we're being diligent in looking for causes of autism.
We can't stick our heads in the sand and ignore the possibility''.
Among the parents who told their stories, and who became teary-eyed along with most in the packed hearing room was Shelly Reynolds of Baton Rouge.
She said her son Liam was the normal bubbly child who would sing `itsy bitsy spider,' and chime in with Eieio on `Old McDonald'.
But within days of his vaccination, she said, he became either unruly or spaced-out, and lost his ability to speak and interact.
She told the committee that you cannot miss such sudden awful and sudden changes if you are a parent.
``Parents like me are relying on you to demand that the pharmaceutical companies retrace their steps once again, and the public health community look at the possibility that these things might not be a coincidence''.
Complicating the whole question, and making it more urgent at the same time, is the dramatic rise in the reporting of autism in several countries, including the United States.
In the 1960s, various estimates suggested there were about one to four cases of autism for every 10,000 children.
By the 1990s, the numbers had shot up more than four-fold to 12 per 10,000 in England, and two-to-five fold in different studies in the U.S.
But it is unclear whether the increase is due to increased reporting of the disease, which has become much better known in recent years, especially after the film `Rain Man' about an autistic man.
After listening to exchanges of scientific details for two hours, Waxman read the language of a proposed letter to the secretary of Health and Human Services asking for an impartial study of the question; Burton agreed to co-sign it, but added that he will continue to dog the issue with further hearings until better answers are forthcoming.
The only thing more puzzling than autism itself is why it appears to be on the rise.
Grasping at clues, researchers and parents have come up with a variety of theories _ many of them at odds with one another.
But so far, the answer remains as inaccessible as the patients themselves.
The most likely explanation is that there are multiple causes, and that some interaction between genetic and environmental factors causes brain development to go awry.
Proposed triggers range from milk or wheat allergies to viruses or environmental toxins.
Many children with autism, for example, have digestive problems, including food allergies, a phenomenon that has given rise to the ``rogue peptide'' theory.
The idea is that children who have trouble digesting wheat gluten or cow's milk create peptides that mimic natural hormones or neurotransmitters.
When these rogue peptides get into the brain, they interfere with normal development.
Other theories postulate that autism develops after something triggers an autoimmune response in the brain.
One recent study, for example, found that the autistic children who had antibodies to the measles virus in their blood also had higher levels of antibodies to their own brain tissue, particularly to a protein found in myelin, the substance that forms the protective sheath around nerve fibers.
The viral connection has been fueled by anecdotal evidence from parents whose children first showed autistic symptoms after being immunized with measles-mumps-rubella vaccine, which is usually given between 12 and 15 months.
So far, however, no scientific studies have been able to link vaccines and autism.
According to a recent report in the British medical journal Lancet, for example, the incidence of autism in the United Kingdom has been increasing since 1979.
The MMR vaccine was introduced in 1988, but there was no sharp increase in cases of autism after that.
In addition, the average age of onset of autism is the same for children whether they have been vaccinated or not, further weakening a proposed link between the vaccine and the disorder.
But parents are still worried, and researchers acknowledge the question needs further study.
Although the debate surrounding viruses continues, there is some definitive evidence that outside agents can cause autism.
For example, it is known that babies whose mothers took the anti-nausea drug thalidomide at 28 days' gestation have a much higher incidence of autism.
Autism also has been associated with children born to mothers who were given drugs to control their epilepsy, said Dr.
Alan Unis, associate professor of psychiatry at the UW.
Those examples suggest the development of autism is foreshadowed in the earliest stages of embryonic brain development.
There may be many more unknown agents that could cause such damage.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, for example, have been investigating whether an unusually high incidence of autism in Brick Township, N.J., could be related to environmental causes, or is simply a statistical artifact.
There have been 40 cases of autism diagnosed among the 6,000 3- to 10-year-old children living in the township, a rate that is at least triple the estimated national average.
Whatever the cause, the overall rise in the incidence of autism nationally has been dramatic.
``It's very difficult to estimate prevalence,'' Dawson said.
``Twenty years ago, we said 4 or 5 out of 10,000.
Today, we say 1 in 500 or 1,000.
``We don't know if the increase in prevalence is accounted for entirely by diagnostic methods getting better, or whether there is an (actual) increase''.
Clinicians, however, say the increase is real.
``Absolutely, it's becoming more common,'' said psychology professor Eric Trupin who heads the Division of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry at Children's Hospital in Seattle.
And some parents say the many competing theories don't have to be mutually exclusive.
``Autism causes such a broad spectrum (of symptoms),'' said Audrey Horne, president of the Autism Society of America and parent of a 31-year-old son with autism.
``There has to be more than one cause.''
Repligen Corp.
said Wednesday that secretin, its drug to treat autism, does not appear to work after a single injection, although company officials predicted that more positive results will appear with higher doses.
The Needham, Mass.
biotechnology company said the New England Journal of Medicine will publish Thursday a study by a North Carolina group that independently tested the drug on 18 patients.
``A single dose of synthetic human secretin is not an effective treatment for autism or pervasive developmental disorder,'' the study concluded.
Repligen, which owns the drug, was not involved in the evaluation but plans to launch its own test early next year with about 100 autistic children taking multiple doses over three or four months.
Repligen stock closed Wednesday at 3 3/16, up 3/16.
Autism affects 500,000 Americans and is a disorder in which a young child cannot develop normal social relationships.
There are no drugs to directly treat the disorder, although in some cases drugs are used to control aggressive and self-destructive behavior.
Many autistic youngsters also suffer from gastrointestinal problems such as repeated diarrhea.
Repligen maintains that multiple doses _ not the single dose results chronicled in the New England Journal of Medicine _ will lead to changes in behavior.
``Kids whose diarrhea disappears in 48 hours after taking secretin tend to have normal stools and very often this leads to improvement in autistic symptoms, such as better eye contact, improved communications and trailing after siblings,'' said Walter C.
Herlihy, Repligen president and chief executive, officer whose 8-year-old daughter Lilian is autistic.
He explained that in March, a Wall Street Journal article revealed some promising results based on anecdotal evidence from over 1,000 autistic patients who had used secretin as an experimental drug.
Those findings prompted a group of investors in Ashville, N.C. to sponsor a formal clinical trial.
However, they relied on a single dose of secretin with four weeks of observation.
``What they did is analogous to measuring behavioral changes in an Alzheimer patient with one dose of a drug,'' said Herlihy.
``We have always said a single dose does not produce significant results.''
When news broke a few months ago that Seattle would become one of two places in the country doing federally funded research on an experimental treatment for autism, the researchers were deluged with calls.
Fifty-one slots.
Four hundred families.
The overwhelming response is an indication of how desperate families are for something that works better than available methods.
Hopes surrounding secretin, a natural digestive hormone that may help treat autism, have been building since two parents accidentally discovered that the hormone appeared to help their autistic child.
In 1996, Victoria and Gary Beck of New Hampshire went to a gastrointestinal specialist to help diagnose some digestive difficulties in their autistic son, Parker.
The doctor injected the boy with porcine secretin, a hormone commonly used to assess gastrointestinal problems.
Shortly after the doctor's visit, Parker's autistic traits began improving dramatically.
He went from being non-verbal before the injection to saying words.
Initially, the Becks had to fight with skeptical doctors to get them to acknowledge that secretin might have had something to do with the results.
The biological explanation is not as far-fetched as it might seem.
On a basic level, the ``purpose of the brain is to keep the stomach full,'' said Dr.
Alan Unis, professor of psychiatry at the University of Washington.
The brain and the gut communicate with each other.
``They need to have a common language,'' Unis said.
Secretin, which binds to receptors in both the gut and the brain, could form that link.
It is plausible that altering secretin levels could affect brain function.
It has not taken much convincing for other parents.
Publicity about the Becks story has fueled worldwide demand for the hormone, creating shortages and driving up prices.
That worried the National Institutes of Health.
Although secretin is approved for use as a one-time injection as a diagnostic agent for stomach problems, it hasn't yet been approved for multiple injections as a therapeutic agent.
Concerned that children were being given an untried drug with unknown results, the NIH expedited a clinical trial to study the drug's potential.
The Seattle group is testing a preparation similar to that used in the Becks' case.
The preparation, derived from pigs, is about 60 percent secretin and 40 percent unknown ``pig gut'' ingredients.
Researchers are also testing a pure, synthesized version of secretin.
The purpose of including both is to rule out the possibility that some other unknown compound in the porcine secretin preparation is having an effect.
Each child will get one injection of secretin or a placebo and be evaluated for effects one month later.
Researchers expect to have preliminary results in about six months.
Children began receiving the injections late last month.
However high the hopes, experts warn that secretin is not the first treatment to look promising.
``Autism has a terrible history of wild cures,'' said Eric Trupin, a UW psychology professor who is also director of the child and adolescent psychiatry at Children's Hospital in Seattle.
Some work for a few families.
None seems to work for all.
Most have not been scientifically tested.
``We are a very vulnerable group,'' said Audrey Horne, president of the Autism Society of America.
``Most parents, there's not a thing they wouldn't do if they thought it would cure their child''.
That has led to a parade of treatments, including megavitamins, special diets, auditory training, ``holding therapy'' and swimming with dolphins.
Such treatments gain footholds in part because there is a powerful ``placebo effect'' at work.
Parents are often so hopeful for results, they see them where objective observers would not.
Researchers have seen hopes raised by drugs before.
In the 1980s, fenfluramine, a drug that reduces the blood level of serotonin, was being touted as a wonder drug for autism.
About one-third of children with autism have higher than normal levels of serotonin, another chemical that acts in both the digestive system and the brain.
Initial optimism about the drug faded after studies failed to find beneficial effects.
So far, secretin seems promising.
Researchers caution, however, that although it is tempting to hope for a pill or a shot that will make autism go away, the reality is likely to be much more complicated.
Based on anecdotal reports, secretin seems to have some beneficial effect in about half the families that try it, Unis said.
It may be that there is a subtype of autism that responds to secretin.
Frustrated by the lack of scientific backing for many treatments, parents have begun organizing to raise money and press for better research.
In addition to lobbying for more research funding, the Cure Autism Now Foundation also has established a gene bank of ``multiplex'' families with more than one autistic child to help speed the identification of genes associated with autism.
In just over three years, the bank has enrolled 465 families, creating an unrivaled genetic data bank for researchers.
Sen. Slade Gorton, R-Wash.
, who has a grandson with autism, has co-sponsored legislation to earmark $46.5 million for autism research.
The legislation failed this fall, but autism advocates have vowed to redouble their efforts to get the funding this spring.
Better understanding of the disease is likely to lead to better treatments, Horne said.
``With autism, we're just beginning to come out of the dark ages.''
ATLANTA _ Aside from Hollywood's sometimes inaccurate portrayal of autism, few people know much about the disorder.
A gathering this week in Atlanta sponsored by the Autism Society of America, ``2000 National Conference on Autism: Celebrating Our Future,'' is focusing on treatment options, research and the incidence of autism.
The conference continues through Wednesday.
``We hope to bring in 1,000 attendees, and, hopefully, people will have a better understanding about autism at the end of the conference,'' said Vernell Henry, director of conferences for the society.
Parents and people whose family members are affected by autism are the target group of the conference, which is organized around five areas: communications; education; family and community; medicine and research; and options for adulthood and independence.
Autism was previously thought to affect one in 500 people, but the number is actually closer to one in 250, according to a study by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Here are some frequently asked questions about the disorder, with answers by the Autism Society of America: Q: What is autism?
A: Autism is a complex developmental disease that is four times more prevalent in boys than girls.
It affects the normal development of the brain in the areas of social interaction and communication skills.
No one knows what the cause of autism is.
It knows no racial, ethnic or social boundaries.
Adults and children living with autism usually have difficulty with verbal and nonverbal communication, and leisure or play activities.
In some cases, aggressive and self-injurious behavior may be present.
They may exhibit repeated body movements, such as hand flapping and rocking, unusual responses to people or attachments to objects and resistance to changes in routine.
Some people with autism may also have other disorders that affect functioning of the brain such as epilepsy, mental retardation and Down syndrome.
They may also have genetic disorders such as Tourette's syndrome or Williams syndrome.
Q: What causes autism?
A: Current research links autism to biological or neurological differences in the brain, but no specific cause.
Autism is not a mental illness.
It is not caused by bad parenting, and children with autism are not kids who choose to misbehave.
Q: What are some of the treatments?
A: Studies show that individuals with autism respond well to highly structured, specialized education programs tailored to their needs.
Early intervention leads to better results.
Q: Is there a way to diagnose autism?
A: There are no medical tests.
Accurate diagnoses should be based on observation of an individual's communication, behavior and developmental levels.
Signs of autism typically appear during the first three years of life.
Q: Should parents shelter their children once it is determined they have autism?
A: ``It is very important that children be kept close to other developing children,'' said Gail McGee, director of the autism center at Emory University.
Parents should push for children's inclusion in normal social activities to induce growth and development in that area, she said.
Story Filed By Cox Newspapers For Use By Clients of the New York Times News Service
It's time, once again, for the screaming.
Evan O'Neal, 4, ambles into an examination room at the Southwest Autism Research Center cradling a worn Big Bird.
His other hand, as usual, hangs from his mouth like a large extra tooth.
As he's hoisted onto the table for an injection to test secretin, the drug his parents hope will cure his autism, Evan explodes with a piercing, sirenlike scream.
His father drapes his body over the writhing boy.
The doctor with the needle hums in a soothing baritone.
Evan's mother strokes his forehead.
Evan stops long enough for a couple of mucus-choked coughs.
Then, he screams again.
As Evan flails, the needle pops out.
As the doctors and nurses scramble to reinsert it, Evan's arms come free and he grabs his father as if his neck were the last life preserver on a sinking ship.
Evan's mother, Mary, also draped over her son, starts singing the alphabet.
His father, Benton, joins in.
So do the nurses and doctors.
``Is it working''? one asks.
Another responds, half-jokingly, ``I don't know about him, but it's comforting for us''.
The five-minute procedure seems to last a day.
Finally, his parents rip off the Velcro restraints.
Dazed and red-eyed, Evan grabs Big Bird and wanders off to a playroom.
``God,'' someone says, ``I hope he got the real thing''.
&QL; &QC; Evan is one of the lucky ones.
Out of hundreds of candidates, he was one of 30 Valley children selected for the double-blind test.
Two-thirds of the kids got secretin, the drug that many believe will cure the enigma that is autism.
More and more families are suffering its heartbreaking effects.
Their babies are born seemingly typical; then, within two or three years, they stop looking Mom and Dad in the eye, they stop making sense when they talk.
Some stop communicating at all.
In some profound way, autism throws a child's world out of balance.
Either the child becomes overly sensitive and withdrawn, or nothing stimulates him and he become disengaged.
Everything, it seems, is too much or too little.
Such children can't distinguish their grandparents from strangers.
They can't look forward to Christmas or make best friends.
Hardly ever do they say, ``I love you, Mommy''.
They wear weighted vests in preschool play circles to keep their bodies, at least, from wandering off.
They scream when movie theater lights go down.
They live in houses without doorknobs.
Houses where playmates never come to visit.
Yet, physically, they look like other children.
How do you so completely lose your child who's right there, nestled in your arms?
So, parents cling to the idea that there ``is'' an answer, that it will take only one good nudge to bring their child back.
And, like Mary O'Neal, they pray that secretin is that nudge.
&QL; &QC; Evan's day begins with a ritual to reinforce that he's part of this world.
While her son is still in his pajamas, O'Neal firmly massages his arms and legs.
Then, she gently pushes up against his bones.
Some with autism get too much stimulation.
It's like living with a headful of stereo speakers and a psychedelic light show, so they turn off their senses and seem blank.
But other autistic children, like Evan, have too little sensitivity.
Evan once grabbed a cactus and got a palmful of needles; he didn't cry.
His eardrum burst; he didn't cry.
As O'Neal presses against her son's pale skin, she sings softly.
He never looks at her.
He wiggles down into his parents' dark green comforter.
His back is rigid, his head cocked.
He listens intently to something no one else hears.
When the 45-minute massage is done, Evan skitters across the room, his arms flapping to continue the stimulation.
The flapping is so typical that parents and researchers call it ``stimming''.
Evan never played with any of his toys, O'Neal recalls.
But he loved carrying around his father's blow dryer and listening to the noise.
``He thought that was the greatest thing since cream cheese,'' she says.
When Evan was 2, his pediatrician delivered a diagnosis that sounded more like a life sentence.
``She spent 20 minutes with him and closed her book and said to us, `Well, I think he is autistic, probably mentally retarded.
You should probably be aware of the fact that you will have to put him in an institution someday,' '' O'Neal says.
Instead, the O'Neals have tried to outfox the diagnosis.
They've eliminated wheat and cow's milk from Evan's diet.
Added vitamins.
Attended support groups.
Consulted doctors and more doctors.
Analyzed and reanalyzed his urine.
Searched the Internet.
Second-guessed themselves.
Gone through physical therapy, speech therapy, occupational therapy.
They've turned their living room into a gym.
And now, Mary O'Neal, 39, watches her younger son, Tim, for signs of autism.
The risk of having a second autistic child is about one in 20.
At the breakfast counter, O'Neal leans into Evan's face.
``Where's Tim''? she coos.
Evan points to his brother.
Delighted, her face nearly splits with a grin.
``This is a high,'' she says.
Then she asks, ``Where's Mommy''?
He points to her.
Then she asks, ``Where's Evan''?
His gaze wanders off.
``Our highs are so high,'' O'Neal says.
That's because everything is such a struggle.
Evan doesn't like things near his face, so he can stand to have only half of his teeth brushed at a time.
He doesn't like mushy foods.
He screams when he touches Play-Doh.
He's never been calm enough to eat at McDonald's.
``At times, I would give my right (arm) not to do this,'' O'Neal says.
``You know, I used to take the easy way out.
I was a follower, not a leader, but I can't be that way anymore.
I am his advocate, and I cannot let him down''.
So now, she spends her days trying to get her son potty-trained.
``Sure he's cute now,'' she says.
``But no one is going to want to change his diapers when he's 18''.
Evan doesn't speak, emitting only an undulating warble when he's excited or happy.
But he can grab the picture cards attached to objects throughout the house to indicate when he wants to watch a video.
Even the smallest payoffs demand vast patience.
Evan can now dunk a ball into a hoop 4 feet off the ground.
``It took us a year to do that,'' his mother says proudly, sadly.
&QL; &QC; ``What's going to set them off''?
Karen Jason wonders as she waits for her two kids after school.
Jason carries that worry around all day, starting at 6 a.m. when she hides their shoes and socks in the trunk of her car.
If they saw them, they'd throw a fit and never leave the house.
Despite her best efforts, something goes awry.
Instead of getting off the school bus and running toward her, 6-year-old Sean runs the opposite way.
He's like a hummingbird with a snootful of caffeine.
Running behind a pole, zigzagging across the parking lot, completely unmindful of people and cars.
Jason, her face flushed, chases him, scoops him up and gives him a piggy-back ride.
It does no good to scold him; words ricochet off.
Jason speaks deliberately.
``Sean, Sean.
We have to get into the car.
Rebecca is waiting for us''.
Even though onlookers are fascinated by the spectacle, Rebecca pays it no mind.
At 8, Sean's big sister doesn't have an ounce of girlishness or silliness.
She gives off no sparks, no spasms of giggles or tears.
She is purposeful as she plays, her mouth set in a straight line that almost never bends.
This is Karen Jason's family: Sean, the rambunctious 6-year-old with the mind of a 3-year-old, and Rebecca, quiet and aloof but considered high-functioning because she communicates more easily.
With both of her children diagnosed as autistic, ``in my world, it's autism that is normal,'' Jason says.
To live in her world, you have to know the language.
What Jason calls ``video talk'' is the only way Sean communicates.
When someone gets angry at him, Sean puts his fist in the person's face and says, ``Will this help''?
It's not a threat, it's a line from ``The Prince and the Pauper'' when Mickey Mouse shows his regal ring and is released from his captors.
At times, translation is more difficult.
Once Jason made an unexpected potty stop.
Because they were in an elementary school after hours, Sean's words echoed in the hallway.
Sean started roaring.
To Jason, it made sense.
The echoing made the same sounds as ``Once Upon A Forest,'' a favorite dinosaur movie.
But his roaring was so loud that the school staff gave them dirty looks as they left the bathroom.
After she told them he was autistic, they apologized.
``But I told them, `Thanks for the look,' '' Jason says.
An elementary school teacher, Jason knows it's a gamble to take her kids out.
Once interested in something, they become fixated.
After spending six hours in a Disney store, they want to stay and will scream like extras in a horror movie when it's time to leave.
When Sean wants reassurance, he'll rush over to Jason and wiggle his head into her thigh.
``He craves that kind of pressure,'' his mother says.
``Of course, it looks really weird''.
Jason knows she must get her kids out of their usual life with its built-in eccentricities _ Sean must have his right sock and shoe on before putting on his left sock.
She's got to get them into the real world.
So, damn the dirty looks, full speed ahead.
She's enrolled them in special baseball programs and had them in talent shows.
She takes them grocery shopping even though the trips take twice as long and often end up in temper tantrums.
At times, Jason will sneak into her son's room and rearrange his two dozen stuffed animals, just to provoke him into communication.
``You've got to pick your battles,'' she says.
Some nights, she lets them interrupt dinner for the umpteenth time to make sure the computer screen hasn't gone blank.
``Everything is so regimented because they like it that way,'' Jason says.
``Life has glitches, and they have to get used to it''.
&QL; &QC; Karen Jason sits expectantly in the center's waiting room as children like Evan O'Neal scream while getting shots.
The expectation level is so feverish that the waiting room feels like a prayer hall.
Sean, playing with his omnipresent stuffed-animal gang, is oblivious of the other children's screams.
Rebecca, as suspicious as an old woman, frets around the room.
For so long, Jason has been doing the best she can _ coping, praying, cajoling, crying.
``Could this drug actually help them''? she wonders, for the thousandth time.
``Is this what they need''? &QL;
WASHINGTON _ Many parents of autistic children haven't been happy with Sen.
Slade Gorton since he proposed making it easier for teachers to suspend from school unruly disabled children.
Gorton, R-Wash.
, isn't backing off his position that schoolteachers need more disciplinary tools to restore order in the classroom, but Wednesday he took another step that drew praise from families of autistic children.
Joined by ``ER'' star Anthony Edwards and former Seattle Mariners pitcher Bill Krueger, Gorton and Rep.
James Greenwood, R-Penn.
, said they would introduce legislation to focus more money and attention on autism research, much of which is conducted at the University of Washington.
The bill would set up five centers for autism research around the country.
Most of those supporting the bill have been touched by autism in some way.
Gorton Wednesday for the first time mentioned publicly that he has an autistic grandson; Edwards has an autistic nephew, Krueger an autistic daughter, and Greenwood worked with autistic children as a social worker before he was elected to Congress.
Infantile autism is a severe neurological disorder appearing in childhood that is characterized by an inability to relate to others, highly repetitive play, and language impairment.
Autism is the third most common developmental disorder among children.
An estimated 400,000 people in this country suffer from the disease.
Gorton called autism ``one of the most common disabling conditions with which children are afflicted, but one that the physicians and the scientists and the researchers tell us can in fact be cured, and is not something that we simply must accept.
``A very significant amount of fine research has already been accomplished, much of it at the University of Washington, and what we would like to do is expand that research across the country, see to it that the researchers are able to work together and share their results, and to try to see that they have sufficient amounts of money and facilities with which to conduct it,'' Gorton said.
The University's Center on Human Development and Disability, funded in part by the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, is conducting research aimed at early detection of autism and at understanding the role of genetic factors in autism.
In addition to the autism research centers, the bill would create a greater role for parents in the National Institutes of Health funding decisions, a gene and tissue bank of autism materials, and a national autism awareness program.
The bill, which sets aside $40 million for autism research over the next year, was pushed by an organization called Cure Autism Now, which was started by Jonathan Shestack, the producer of ``Air Force One,'' and his wife, Portia Iversen.
Scientists for the first time have discovered what they believe may be biological markers in the blood of newborn infants who later develop autism and mental retardation.
The markers consist of abnormally high levels of four brain chemicals that help construct the basic architecture of animal brains, researchers said.
The finding supports what many experts believe may be the root cause of both autism and mental retardation: faulty wiring present from birth.
The discovery, presented by scientists at the annual meeting of the American Academy of Neurology in San Diego, still needs to be replicated in larger studies.
But if it proves true, it could open the door to new opportunities for treating these devastating mental disorders that affect as many as six out of every 1,000 newborns.
If doctors can screen for autism and mental retardation at birth, scientists say, affected babies could be given special early enrichments or drugs designed to help their brains develop more normally.
The research, described for the first time publicly Wednesday by Dr.
Karin B.
Nelson, a neurologist at the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke in Bethesda, Md.
, was carried out by that institute in collaboration with the California Birth Defects Monitoring Program in Berkeley and George Washington University Medical Center in Washington.
Nelson said in a telephone interview that the study was in the process of being submitted to a scientific journal.
The new work ``is really exciting,'' said Dr.
David Amaral, a neuroscientist at the University of California at Davis and a leading expert on neurodevelopmental disorders, who was not involved in the study.
The world of autism research is littered with false hopes, he said, but this could bring new ways of attacking the problem at a basic scientific level.
``If this study can be replicated and confirmed, it will be very important,'' said Dr.
Eric Courchesne, an autism expert at the University of California in San Diego.
People have been looking for triggers, like measles vaccinations, to help explain the onset of autism symptoms, he said.
But this study suggests that the defects may be present much earlier and it certainly ``stimulates new ideas about the cause of these disorders,'' he said.
Still, it could turn out that these brain proteins ``are not predictive of anything,'' said Dr.
Edwin Cook, a psychiatrist and autism expert at the University of Chicago.
``The work is exciting and I hope it's correct,'' he said, but the fact that four proteins are elevated ``does not mean there is one simple pathway'' in the brain to explain these disorders.
Researchers have long suspected that autism and mental retardation are caused by faulty brain wiring or abnormal brain chemistry that are present from birth, Nelson said.
But this notion has been very difficult to prove because the main symptoms of the disorders, severe social withdrawal in autism and low IQ in mental retardation, are generally not diagnosed until children are around 3 years old.
There has never been a way to identify the babies who might have these brain abnormalities and so researchers have not been able study the problem early in life.
The latest findings are the result of a collaboration of researchers from three scientific disciplines: neurochemistry, epidemiology and analytical immunochemistry.
Neurochemists have identified many brain proteins that help cells survive, make connections between cells and lay the basis for learning and memory, Nelson said.
The thinking was that some of these molecules might be involved in autism and mental retardation, but which ones remained a mystery.
``We chose eight of them,'' Nelson said, ``and went on a fishing expedition''.
The ``fishing'' took place at the California Birth Defects Monitoring Program, which is in Berkeley.
The program, established nearly 20 years ago, takes and preserves blood samples from one in seven babies born in California each year and uses the blood to help track down causes of birth defects.
For example, the program recently helped show a link between babies born with cleft palates and mothers who smoked cigarettes.
The blood samples are stored in a warehouse and can be fetched any time epidemiologists have questions to explore, said Dr.
John Harris, director of the program.
In this case, staff members in the program went to clinics in Northern California and located teen-agers _ 64 with autism, 66 with an IQ below 50 but no autism, 65 with cerebral palsy and 54 normal controls.
All the teen-agers were born between 1983 and 1985 and all had blood samples stored in the warehouse.
The samples were sent to Dr.
Terry Phillips, an immunochemist at George Washington University and at the Office of Research Services at the National Institutes of Health who uses sophisticated new techniques to fish tiny amounts of proteins out of blood samples.
Four of the brain proteins looked the same in all the teen-agers, he said.
But the other four _ vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP), calcitonin-related gene peptide (CGRP), brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and neurotrophin-4 (NT4) _ were extremely high in nearly all the autistic and mentally retarded teen-agers.
None of the controls and fewer than 10 percent of those with cerebral palsy had elevated levels of these proteins, he said.
High levels of these four proteins are like ``smoking guns'' present at birth in the brains of infants who go on to develop autism and mental retardation in early childhood, the researchers said.
While these disabilities have many manifestations and run a gamut from severe to mild, they often overlap, Nelson said.
Too much or too little of these brain chemicals at different points in development could help explain the spectrum seen in so many children.
Nelson stressed several caveats: that the findings would have to be replicated using other groups of children, that the technique used for testing blood was new and not widely available and that more work needed to be done to show exactly what was normal and not normal in regard to these proteins at birth.
(STORY CAN END HERE.
OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS) nn But researchers who are familiar with the four proteins said the finding was highly provocative given what was known about them.
For example, Dr.
Douglas Brenneman, chief of the section on developmental and molecular pharmacology at the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development in Bethesda, said one protein, VIP, was akin to a master molecule used for ``putting brains together''.
It exerts powerful effects on at least a dozen brain chemicals, including the other three identified in this study, he said.
Early in development, fetuses get VIP from the mother's immune cells.
After birth, the baby makes VIP in parts of the brain that underlie cognition, learning and memory and also in other parts of the body, including the intestines, where it dilates tissues.
Secretin, a digestive hormone that is being given to many autistic children with the hope that it will alleviate their behavioral problems, is in the VIP family, Brenneman said.
But there is no evidence that VIP-like substances from the intestines can ever get into the brain, he said.
Nearly every controlled clinical trial of secretin has failed to show that the hormone works as claimed, Amaral said.
On the other hand, there could be ``brain and gut interactions'' that are not yet understood.
This finding about biological markers ``opens the barn door wide open to look for deeper causes of autism and mental retardation,'' Harris said.
``Until now, we didn't even know this barn door was there.''
On the outside, the Brestler house looks like any number of gracious Eastside homes for a growing family with three children.
On the inside, it's a little different.
But it's not obvious at first.
There are invisible alarms on all the doors here, to keep children from wandering away.
And what looks like a well-appointed playroom is really a fully equipped behavioral therapy center.
The Brestlers have three boys.
The two youngest have autism.
Max, 8, and Kevin, 6, look like typical children.
Inside, they are a little different.
And it isn't always obvious at first.
They, too, have ``invisible alarms'' locking away parts of their brains.
The brain disorder interferes with their ability to develop language and form relationships.
Even a few years ago, the fact the Brestlers have two boys with the disease would have seemed an almost unfathomable coincidence.
Today, researchers believe there is a strong genetic component to autism, which is three to four times more common in boys than girls.
The odds are about 1-in-20 that a family with one child with autism will have another.
That's 50 to 100 times the rate expected in the general population.
That indicates a high genetic component to autism, said Geraldine Dawson, professor of psychology and director of the autism project at the University of Washington.
``We believe at least five genes are involved''.
In studies of identical twins in which one twin has autism, the chance of the other twin being affected is about 70 percent.
In fraternal twins _ those who do not share identical genetic status _ the chances that the second twin will also be autistic is about 5 percent.
When Max was first diagnosed at age 2, Linda Brestler had no idea she would soon face a second loss.
But she was already worried about Kevin, still under a year, who at 10 months had such low muscle tone he could not hold his head up and was not crawling.
She remembers reading the book ``Let Me Hear Your Voice,'' a book by a mother of two autistic children.
``When I got to the section where her second son was diagnosed, I threw the book across the room,'' she said.
``It was mind-boggling, the thought I could possibly have two.
I remember rocking Kevin, saying, `Please, God, don't take him away from me, too'''.
But rearing Max and Kevin has given her a different perspective.
``People lose the idea they're just kids,'' Brestler said.
``You forget, they're regular kids before they're autistic''.
And like regular kids, Max and Kevin are as different from each other as any two siblings.
Dark-haired Max doesn't speak.
He struggles to move his tongue to form sounds.
The shapes of words elude him.
About one-third of children with autism remain mute.
``Are you hungry, Max''? his mother asks.
``Ahh''. Soft, plaintive.
Max's way of saying yes.
Even though he doesn't talk, his receptive language _ ability to understand _ is near normal.
Max has a shy smile, a tentative walk.
He doesn't like long hair, or the feel of grass under his feet.
``He has a thing about textures,'' says Bridgette Tuttle, one of his therapists.
He is afraid of stairs.
Max was about 18 months old when his parents first noticed he was losing eye contact.
``He was withdrawing, and we started questioning his hearing because he wasn't responding to his name,'' Brestler said.
The word autism never entered her mind.
Doctors told her to watch and wait.
The more she waited, the more nervous she got.
Eventually, she looked autism up in a medical dictionary.
``It was a three-line definition,'' she said.
``Everything fit Max.
``The first year of life, they're developing seemingly normally,'' she said.
``Then that second year, you just lose them; it's quite devastating''.
Six years later, Max is taking a break from his daily regimen of behavioral therapy.
He sits in a small rocker, fading in and out.
Occasionally, his hands dart together in quick claps.
He has an obsession with rectangles, especially videotape boxes.
He likes to hold them, turning them slowly in his hands, or incessantly rearranging them.
Brestler redirects him every few minutes with a question.
The questions get him out of his ``self-stimming,'' the slang parents of autistic children use to describe the range of baffling, repetitive behaviors that steal their children's attention away from the world.
Kevin, in contrast, is the lively, social one.
On this day, he hurtles across the family room into his mother's lap.
The room is strewn with soft-cover books, their bindings curled.
He doesn't read them.
They are a ``self-stimming'' object, like his brother's videotapes.
Unlike his brother, Kevin was a social baby who made good eye contact.
``But motorwise (as a baby), he was starting to have problems,'' Brestler said.
``He presented very differently (than Max)''.
Today, Kevin is verbal, although he mainly talks to himself.
He responds to simple commands and questions, but can't engage in conversation.
He doesn't understand as much language as Max.
One of the hardest things about having two children with autism is the misconceptions people have about the disorder, Brestler says.
It's not true, for example, that children with autism aren't affectionate, or can't learn, or are completely out of touch with reality, she said.
She has seen otherwise.
It has taken 20 hours a week of therapy for nearly six years, but Max finally has grasped the intent of language, and communicates by pointing in a book of photographs to his favorite foods and activities.
He has worked his way up to about 10 sounds.
``He says, `Aah uuh ooh,''' she said.
``It means `I love you.'''
LOS ANGELES (AP) --A new test aimed at helping doctors predict whether newborn children will develop autism or mental retardation confirms that such disorders are present at birth and are not the result of nurturing, researchers said.
Autism likely arises from a combination of genetic defects and exposure to toxic chemicals, viruses or other environmental substances, according to the California Birth Defects Monitoring Program, which is run jointly by the state and the March of Dimes.
The crucial period for such factors is the early weeks of pregnancy as the central nervous system forms, the researchers said.
''I don't use the word breakthrough lightly, but that is what this (test) looks like to me,'' said Dr.
John Harris, chief of the program.
''This could potentially have a huge impact on society''.
The findings, reported Wednesday at a San Diego meeting of the American Academy of Neurology, could lead to better treatment for patients and new ways to prevent the disorders, Harris said.
Experts cautioned that the results have not yet been formally published and reviewed by other scientists.
Some parents believe that autism can be caused by adverse reactions to disease vaccinations because many children develop the first signs of the mental disorder after immunization at 18 months.
A team from the monitoring program examined stored blood samples collected from 249 infants during the 1980s.
The researchers found unusually high levels of four proteins associated with brain development in nearly all the samples from children who later were diagnosed with autism or mental retardation.
None of the proteins appeared in infants who developed normally.
''This really is an exciting finding, but it doesn't mean scientists have a specific test for autism, since mentally retarded children had the same elevated protein levels,'' Dr.
David Amaral said.
Amaral is director of the MIND Institute at the University of California, Davis, which provided part of the funding for the study.
For both mental retardation and autism, this is the first time a clear biological marker has been identified at such an early age, said Walter Herlihy, president of Repligen Corp.
The company is testing a hormone called secretin as a potential treatment for autism.
''I'm going to go back and incorporate this in our clinical trials to see if the markers are present in older children as well,'' he said.
To validate its own research, the monitoring program is preparing to study as many as 5,000 autistic children, said Dr.
Judith K.
Grether, the study's principal researcher.
The findings will be compared to tests of several thousand healthy children serving as a control group, she said.
The validation study is expected to take five years to complete.
The Seattle Post-Intelligencer plans to move the following for clients of the NYTimes News Service for editions of Tuesday, Nov.
16, and thereafter.
If you have any questions, please call Larry Johnson at (206) 448-8035.
DAM-FISH (Undated) _ A panel of scientists assembled by the federal government says punching holes in four Snake River dams in southeastern Washington is the best way to help endangered salmon there.
But that conclusion drew unmerciful fire in the region and in the halls of Congress.
So this week federal fisheries managers will tell Pacific Northwesterners, in effect: ``OK, you figure out what to do''.
They will offer a menu of other, equally unpleasant alternatives that, among other things, have the potential to cause a faceoff between Washington and Idaho over water rights.
By Robert McClure.
(Story will move in the ``a'' category).
GORE-MICROSOFT (Undated) _ The vice president makes a visit to Microsoft, weighing in on the federal court monopoly ruling and other matters.
By Joel Connelly.
Story will move in the ``a'' category).
AUTISM-SPECIAL (Undated) _ Special package: Autism is a mysterious brain disorder that affects between 1 out of 500 and 1 out of 1,000 children.
Scientists cannot agree on the incidence, except to say it appears to be growing.
No one knows exactly why.
But the rise is fueling an unprecedented concern over the best way to help children with autism, as well as intensified research into possible causes and cures.
By Carol Smith.
(Story will move in the ``a'' category).
AUTISM-CURE (Undated) _ When news broke a few months ago that Seattle would become one of two places in the country doing federally funded research on an experimental treatment for autism, the researchers were deluged with calls.
Fifty-one slots.
Four hundred families.
By Carol Smith.
(Story will move in the ``a'' category).
AUTISM-CAUSE (Undated) _ The only thing more puzzling than autism itself is why it appears to be on the rise.
Grasping at clues, researchers and parents have come up with a variety of theories _ many of them at odds with one another.
But so far, the answer remains as inaccessible as the patients themselves.
By Carol Smith.
(Story will move in the ``a'' category).
AUTISM-KIDS (Undated) _ On the outside, the Brestler house looks like any number of gracious Eastside homes for a growing family with three children.
On the inside, it's a little different.
But it's not obvious at first.
There are invisible alarms on all the doors here, to keep children from wandering away.
And what looks like a well-appointed playroom is really a fully equipped behavioral therapy center.
The Brestlers have three boys.
The two youngest have autism.
By Carol Smith.
(Story will move in the ``a'' category).
AUTISM-THERAPY (Undated) _ The explosion in the population of children with autism has created huge demand for therapists who can provide ``Applied Behavioral Analysis'' (ABA), the only widely accepted treatment for autism.
By Carol Smith.
(Story will move in the ``a'' category).
AUTISM-INFO (Undated) _ A list of agencies providing information on autism.
By Carol Smith.
(Story will move in the ``a'' category).
TV-BEST (Undated) _ Just to stay on top of the game, conscientious TV critics _ and they all know who they are _ watch a lot of stuff they don't necessarily like.
This helps explain the times they've had to tell loved ones they couldn't go out to Chez Chimichanga for the free-range chicken burrito on a Friday night because they had to stay home and watch ABC's TGIF lineup.
By John Levesque.
(Story has moved in the ``e'' category).
FBN-VECSEY-COLUMN _ Laura Vecsey column on Seahawks defensive star Cortez Kennedy.
By Laura Vecsey.
(Story will move in the ``s'' category).
FBN-SEAHAWKS _ Joey Galloway is convinced he's the elite receiver in the NFL.
After watching his performance Sunday night before a national television audience, his teammates agree.
Question is, does his coach?
By Clare Farnsworth.
(Story will move in the ``s'' category.)
WEST WINDSOR, N.J.
_ One family came from India, others from Greece, Italy and Israel.
An Australian family is thinking about coming.
By comparison, Rob and Anne Mandel had it pretty easy, giving up his medical practice and a life they loved in Indiana to get their son, Sam, the help he needed in New Jersey.
Sam is autistic, and his parents' move here made the Mandels part of a phenomenon: families that, desperate for the most sophisticated special education services for their disabled children, have moved from other states and even other nations in search of care.
But, increasingly, the needs of parents with autistic children are clashing with the bottom lines of school districts that have to pay for enormously expensive services _ often more than $40,000 per child per year _ for students who may never set foot in district classrooms, but will be sent to private institutions at a school district's expense.
Most districts are sympathetic to the needs of families, increasingly armed with sophisticated knowledge about programs and treatments, who uproot themselves to get their children the best care.
But many districts, particularly in states like New Jersey with programs that are magnets for families around the country and the world, say schools are bearing too much of the cost with too little control over which children get what care.
``It's driving the suburban school districts crazy,'' said James H.
Lytle, the superintendent of Trenton's public schools.
``If you have eight kids who need to go to a special school, you have to go to your taxpayers for $400,000.
That's essentially like sending them all to Andover''.
Dr. Lytle added, ``I hate the whole thing''.
A 1975 federal law, guarantees a ``free and appropriate public education'' for all disabled students.
But the education available in most places cannot compare with what is offered in states like New Jersey, Massachusetts and Pennsylvania, which have the most sophisticated private programs for treating autism.
So families, many of whom share information on the Internet, are increasingly relocating to areas with the best programs.
Total school enrollment in New Jersey grew by 11.8 percent from 1991 to 1997, the most recent year for which comparable figures are available.
The number of disabled students increased by 14 percent.
The number of autistic children registered in New Jersey increased sevenfold, from 234 to 1,634.
Part of the increase may be due to better diagnostic methods or the inclusion of children with behaviors that resemble autism.
But migration obviously plays a major role.
``If you're a parent of a child that has been diagnosed with something like autism, you are not going to wait,'' said Gary S.
Mayerson, a New York lawyer who specializes in representing families battling school districts over care for disabled children.
``You are going to look at your beautiful house and realize that it is a noose around your neck.
So people are moving all over the country to get to states that are most responsive to their child's needs''.
The treatment most in demand for autism is a method known as applied behavioral analysis, a form of highly structured and very expensive one-on-one coaching by trained teachers.
While other treatments try to help youngsters cope with their disabilities, applied behavioral analysis, administered at an early age, offers children the possibility of eventually being able to attend regular classes, its advocates say.
So parents flock to the Princeton Child Development Institute, where Sam Mandel and 34 other students are enrolled, or the Eden Institute, in West Windsor, N.J., or to the Martin C.
Barell School, in Levittown, N.Y.
And they go to the Connecticut Child Development Center in Milford, where a couple from India showed up with their child earlier this month, hoping in vain to gain enrollment even though the school was full, said Suzanne Letso, the school's director.
``I'm a doctor _ I sent people to have sophisticated tests all the time in Indiana,'' Dr.
Mandel, an anesthesiologist, said.
For that reason, he said, ``I thought there was no reason to be closer to New York City to get these sophisticated services for Sam.
But you know what?
There's nothing back there like what we have here''.
For $46,024.20 per year, the Princeton institute provides 10 months of intensive training to help autistic children discover a sense of the rewards of learning that they are born without.
Although they may be capable of brilliant feats of intellect _ think of Dustin Hoffman's character in ``Rain Man'' _ autistic children totally lack both curiosity about the world and the instinct to learn by imitating other children and adults.
Patricia Krantz, director of the Princeton institute, said that half the children who came to her school early enough were sent to regular classrooms within five years.
If people object to paying something like $200,000 to achieve such a goal, she said, they should think of the alternative: a lifetime of institutionalization, ``not to mention the human cost''.
(STORY CAN END HERE.
OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS) nn Sam Mandel is making spectacular progress, his parents say.
But for every winner like him, the huge expense of special education programs and the scarcity of places at the most sought-after schools also create losers.
Only a comparative handful of autistic children gain admission to the best private programs, and they tend to be the children of parents with the education and money and careers that permit them to move from state to state and from country to country to seek out those programs.
An engineer in India, for example, researched his child's disability over the Internet and pinpointed Lawrence Township, N.J., as a good place for treatment, said Terry Rosenfeld, Lawrence's director of special education.
Then he found a job at Bell Laboratories in Hopewell, secured the necessary work papers to allow him to immigrate, and moved his family to Lawrence.
Rosenfeld said eight severely handicapped children who had moved to the district to receive treatment were now enrolled.
``We definitely have parents moving in just for these services,'' said Susan DiDonato, director of special services for West Windsor-Plainsboro public schools.
``Sometimes they call ahead and ask us what we have available''.
But the migration and the legal requirements for ``appropriate'' education raise issues of cost and control.
``The parents' definition of appropriate and the district's definition of appropriate are often very different,'' said Rosenfeld.
If the disagreement leads to litigation, ``when you go to court, the courts often look at what parents are saying before they listen to us,'' he added.
``And that is why, to me, I think the system is totally out of control''.
As Rosenfeld suggested, local schools want control over the assignment of students and their education plans, and generally favor local or county-based programs, typically at a local community college.
Parents complain that the local programs, while cheaper, do not offer enough hours of training per week, let alone the special benefits like home visits that places like the Princeton institute offer.
The federal law requires the federal government to to pay 40 percent of a the cost of services provided under the education act.
But the government has never paid his district more than 8 percent, Rosenfeld said.
The state, meanwhile, reimburses school districts on a sliding scale, depending on the severity of the disability, but never more than $11,000 per child.
Some educators, in defense of the special-care migrants, say that parents who relocate should be applauded for placing confidence in their new homes' school systems.
``If anything, we should be proud that we are so successful,'' said Barbara Gantwerk, director of the Office of Special Education Programs at the New Jersey Department of Education.
Indeed, advocates for the children say, the biggest problem is not what it costs to educate such children at the best treatment centers, but that not enough children get that care.
But Rosenfeld, at Lawrence public schools, said he was deeply discouraged over the drain that expensive treatments for a few children were imposing on other programs.
``The parents will do absolutely anything for their children, and it's wonderful that these kids have such great advocates,'' Rosenfeld said.
``But it costs a lot of money, and that money has to come from other programs''.
And for families, everything is secondary to getting results for their children.
So when Tim and Leslie Quinn of Charlotte, N.C., realized their son Ryan, now 4, showed signs of autism, Tim Quinn transferred to his company's headquarters in Hackettstown, N.J.
The Quinns sold their dream house in Charlotte, took their two teen-age daughters out of high school and moved to Belle Meade, in the Hillsborough school district, to enroll Ryan in the Princeton school.
They have no regrets.
``Ryan has shocked us all,'' Quinn said.
``Up until September he was not speaking and he was not doing a lot of things, and it was very discouraging.
But then he started speaking, and he's doing very well.''
LOS ANGELES (AP) _ Sex hormones can influence brain development in the young, memory in the old and may explain why young men tend to develop neurological problems like autism and dyslexia while older women suffer from depression and anxiety, scientists say.
``We are recognizing with some surprise the extent to which the brain responds'' to sex steroids, said Douglas Meinecke of the National Institute of Mental Health in Washington.
``These hormones _ testosterone, progesterone and estrogen _ have profound effects on the brain and the brain is profoundly responsive''.
Meinecke discussed the role of sex hormones in development and aging Monday at the Society for Neuroscience annual meeting.
Researchers hope the hormones can be used to fend off the ravages of aging and disease.
Already, estrogen replacement therapy has been observed to protect older women against Alzheimer's disease.
Nancy Forger, a psychologist at the University of Massachusetts, said she's found that sex hormones can prevent cell death.
Men have more motor neurons in their spinal cords that govern muscles attached to the penis, she found.
The neurons are found both in men and women before birth; however, in the absence of male hormones, the neurons degenerate in females.
Ms. Forger is trying to learn how male hormones save these cells and understand the role of proteins that regulate growth and survival of neurons.
Margaret McCarthy, a physiologist at the University of Maryland School of Medicine, suggested that early exposure to male hormones can create permanent brain changes.
Testosterone levels in rats are as high in development as they're going to be in adulthood, she said.
Giving a female rat testosterone creates ``a male brain never to be switched back''.
Similarly, if testosterone-producing organs are removed from the male rat, he ends up with a ``female brain,'' she said.
Only male reproductive organs produce sex hormones during development, she said.
Female sex organs, which produce estrogen, are inactive until later.
``As far as we know, it is also true for humans,'' Ms.
McCarthy said.
Asked about male and female brain differences, she noted that boys suffer from more neurological disorders than girls.
They're more likely to have schizophrenia, autism and dyslexia, while girls are more likely to suffer neurological illnesses later in life such as major depression, anxiety disorders, panic disorders or eating disorders.
``This hormonal difference early in life may set up a situation that more easily goes awry and explains why boys are more susceptible at an early age,'' she said.
John Morrison, a neurobiology professor at Mount Sinai Medical School in New York, said his studies of estrogen's effects on a brain region called the hippocampus may shed light on aging.
He has that found the number of receptors on hippocampal cells fluctuates, depending on how much estrogen is present.
``The hippocampus mediates memory and loss of memory is one of the key events to aging,'' he said.
In the first study in the country on the incidence of autism among young children, the Centers for Disease Control confirmed Tuesday that there was a striking number of autism cases in Brick Township, N.J., but found no link between the disorder and environmental factors in the town.
Agency officials, who traveled to Brick Tuesday to report the findings of their yearlong investigation, also said that, while there were no other studies in the United States with which to compare their results, the overall prevalence of autism in the country might be higher than previously believed.
The study in Brick Township, prompted by the suspicions of one couple with two autistic children who noticed many other autistic children in their community, found a rate of 4 children with autism per 1,000 between the ages of 3 and 10.
In the of 72,000 people, 36 children are autistic, the study found.
Some studies in Europe and Asia have indicated that as many as 2 of every 1,000 children have some type of autism, the officials said.
``The rates are higher than we previously thought in this country, and nationwide, they may be more in line with what we found in Brick,'' said Jacquelyn Bertrand, who headed the study.
The CDC's objectives were to verify the number of cases of autism in Brick among the children who lived there during 1998 and to examine whether the disorder was linked to chemicals in the township's drinking water, its former landfill and the Metedeconk River, where some residents swim.
It found no such link.
But the number of cases found surprised some people involved in autism research.
``The CDC's findings are astonishing,'' said Dr.
Eric London, vice president of medical affairs for the National Alliance for Autism Research in Princeton, which funds autism research.
Autism is a disorder that affects a child's ability to communicate and function socially.
It varies in severity and has no known cause and no cure.
The study did not confirm the presence of a ``cluster'' of autism cases, a term used by those who have tried to link high cases of a disorder or disease, such as cancers, to a geographic location and its environment.
But, London said, the study in Brick might indicate there may be more autism cases nationwide than anyone previously believed.
``The fact is that we simply do not have enough data to determine the prevalence of autism in this country,'' London said.
``We do not know if this is an unusually high number or if it is representative of autism prevalence in the United States.
Only through additional research will we be able to evaluate the strikingly high numbers found in Brick to determine if they reflectthe population or if there are disparities in the rates in different geographic areas''.
Officials from the Centers for Disease Control held public meetings all day Tuesday at the Brick Township Municipal Building to inform people of their findings.
At an informal briefing Tuesday night, 30 to 40 people milled about, looking at the yellow and blue research graphics on easels or on the walls and asked questions of officials who wore name tags.
Some in the group were parents of autistic children who said they were disappointed at the scope of the study, which was limited to children who had lived there in one year.
Sheryl and Bob Nichols of West Milford, in Northern New Jersey, came to the meeting because they have a 9-year-old son who is autistic.
Nichols said she had contacted CDC officials to tell them she had lived in Brick Township until she was 20 years old, before she became pregnant with her son, but they did not include her in the study because she did not fit into their parameters.
``I still think it has something to do with the environment,'' Nichols said.
``They just haven't found it.
They didn't even interview us''.
The call for the study of Brick Township's problem began through the actions of Bobbie and William Gallagher, who had two autistic children and found that many other autistic children lived near them.
The Gallaghers, with the help of a few other parents of autistic children, conducted their own rudimentary survey of the histories of these children and became concerned about a possible link between Brick Township's environment and the incidence of autistic births.
Inspired by new findings on the way animal brains develop before and after birth, scientists are developing provocative new theories to explain autism, a mysterious brain abnormality that prevents human infants from developing normal social and cognitive skills.
By studying the anatomy of autistic brains, researchers are trying to figure out when in development and where in the brain the complex interaction of genes and environment causes things to go astray.
In the process, they are learning more about the brain circuitry that gives rise to quintessential human traits like language, empathy and the awareness that other people have beliefs and desires different from one's own.
An entire brain circuit has been compromised in autism, said Dr.
David G.
Amaral, a neuroscientist at the University of California at Davis.
Researchers have only begun to study how different brain regions interact dynamically to give rise to such circuits, he said, which puts autism at the frontier of modern neuroscience.
Autism undermines many aspects of human behavior, including movement, attention, learning, memory, language, mood and social interaction.
It can be detected in the movements of babies who roll over, sit up, crawl and walk in oddly uncoordinated ways.
At 18 months, an autistic toddler will not point, share attention with others or follow the expressions of other people.
By age 2 or 3, autistic children display a profound lack of responsiveness to others.
Many do not talk; instead, they may engage in rituals, like arm flapping, that stimulate their bodies.
They dislike change of any sort.
The symptoms of autism range from mild to severe, making the true incidence of the disorder difficult to assess, said Dr.
Marie Bristol-Power, who coordinates autism research at the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development in Bethesda, Md.
Classical autism in its more severe form, which results in mental retardation, occurs in about one in every 1,000 births, she said.
When milder forms of autism like Aspberger's syndrome are included, the incidence is one in 500.
The common feature among all children with autism is a lack of social relatedness.
Some states are reporting what appear to be significant increases in cases of autism, Dr.
Bristol-Power said.
But it is not yet clear if the reports reflect higher incidence of the condition or better diagnosis and the availability of better treatment.
Fifty years ago, researchers believed that autism was caused by cold ``refrigerator'' mothers and weak absent fathers.
Today they are zeroing in on genes.
In identical twins, if one has autism, the second will also have it 90 percent of the time.
At least five or six genes contribute to autism, said Dr.
Bennett Leventhal, director of child and adolescent psychiatry at the University of Chicago.
Studies thus far of autistic siblings suggest that these genes are on Chromosomes 7, 13 and 15.
What these genes are doing is still anybody's guess.
Studies of developing animal brains have found numerous growth factors and proteins that guide fetal brain cells into making proper connections.
Other genes make factors that act as master switches, turning yet other genes on and off at particular points in development.
Some genes suppress cellular activity while others ramp it up, setting the correct balance of chemicals involved in transmitting brain signals.
After birth, different genes begin to nurse connections while others cause cells to die off in a dynamic dance of growth and pruning.
But the growth and elaboration of the nervous system is a continuous process and if something goes seriously wrong early on, all subsequent development may be disturbed.
The question is, how early and where.
Dr. Patricia M.
Rodier, an embryologist at the University of Rochester School of Medicine, believes that the brain glitch in autism occurs between days 20 and 24 of gestation, before a woman knows she is pregnant.
She has evidence that genes involved in laying down basic body and brain structures, called hox genes, are mutated in autism.
Dr. Margaret L.
Bauman, a neurologist at Harvard Medical School, believes that the defect may occur before the middle of the second trimester of pregnancy.
She bases this theory on her extensive knowledge of how and when certain circuits are wired.
Some cells can be ``missing'' only if the defect occurs midway in fetal development, she said.
But Dr.
Eric Courchesne, a neuroscientist at the University of California at San Diego, said that the problem could just as easily occur after a baby is born and as the brain continues to develop.
In October, researchers identified the precise genetic defect in a disorder, Rett's syndrome, that was once commonly misdiagnosed as autism.
Babies are born and develop normally until they are between about 6 months and 24 months old, when a gene that represses other genes fails to shut down as it should.
As a result, the other genes do not swing into action and children stop growing, wring their hands and become mentally retarded.
Courchesne and other researchers believe a similar process may be at work in autism.
Like other brain researchers, scientists who study autism were startled by recent discoveries that the human brain continues to make new brain cells _ not just new connections, as was previously thought _ well into adulthood.
In fact, one scientist has evidence that the number of neurons in the human brain doubles between birth and 6 years.
If this is true, Courchesne said, the child's brain would be undergoing a huge amount of construction created by the interplay of genes and environment.
It might be, he said, that disturbances in this construction give rise to autism.
nn This theory is supported, some researchers say, by the fact that a quarter of autistic children appear normal until age 14-22 months and then experience the sudden onset of autistic symptoms, said Dr.
Nancy J.
Minshew, a psychiatrist at the University of Pittsburgh.
The onset may be caused by a malfunction in one or more genes, she said.
Or it could be set off by something in the environment interacting with a genetically vulnerable child.
Since 1983, Dr.
Bauman and her colleagues have been studying brain tissue obtained in autopsies from autistic children and adults.
While large areas of the 11 brains they studied look normal, she said, the brains are generally bigger and heavier than most.
Most important, there are abnormalities in three major regions that help control social behavior.
Parts of the frontal lobes, which enable decision-making and planning, are thicker than normal.
Cells in the limbic system, where emotions are processed, are a third smaller than normal and are found in excessive numbers.
The cells are also immature, with stunted connections.
Cells in the cerebellum _ a structure that helps in making predictions about what will happen next in terms of movements, thoughts and emotions _ are reduced by 30 percent to 50 percent.
Symptoms of autism can be traced to problems in each of these regions, said Amaral, the neuroscientist at UC-Davis.
For example, neurons in the amygdala respond to faces and the angle of gaze.
Autistic children tend to ignore facial expressions, or at least do not seem to read them well.
Experiments show that autistic children can use their cerebellums to shift attention when they are not paying attention to a particular task.
But when they are asked to make a conscious decision about changing attention, a task that activates their frontal lobes, they can no longer to do the task, presumably because a larger circuit is engaged.
Animal studies also shed light on the biology of social behavior relevant to autism, Amaral said.
For example, monkeys have brain cells that respond to moving hands and faces but not other moving things.
They have cells, called mirror neurons, that fire when the monkey performs an action, like gripping a handle bar, but also when the monkey observes another monkey performing the same action.
They have cells that are activated by sights and sounds generated by others but not by the same sights and sounds when they are self-generated.
Perhaps the human equivalent of these specialized cells are not functioning properly in autism.
Experiments conducted on human autistic children suggest that very specific elements of social behavior are abnormal.
For example, autistic children can use sabotage, but not deception, to prevent another person from attaining a goal.
They can use communicative gestures, like ``come here,'' to affect another person's behavior but not expressive gestures, like ``well done,'' to affect another's mental state.
They can feel the basic pleasure in mastering a task but not the pride, said Dr.
Chris Frith, a neuroscientist at University College London in England.
An emotion like pride requires taking into account other people's expectations, he said.
Another set of recent but not yet published experiments shows that autistic children are bombarded by their own nervous systems, making them more sensitive to stimuli, not less, said Portia Iverson, the founder of Cure Autism Now, a parent group based in Los Angeles, who is an expert on the disorder.
``If you hook a normal person up to a device that measures arousal and make direct eye contact,'' she said, ``you'd see maybe four spikes a minute.
In the same setting, the autistic child has a dozen or more spikes per minute, plus the peaks are extremely high and low, more severe and erratic.
It's like you or I would feel during an earthquake, but they feel that way all day long,'' she said.
In normal learning and memory, Ms.
Iverson said, people encode new information about 30 seconds after getting an arousal peak.
``But what if you have six times too many peaks''? she asked.
``You might encode enormous amounts of highly irrelevant information, focusing on details that don't matter to the rest of us''.
Autism researchers agree that it will take many years before the genetics and neurochemistry of the disorder are understood.
In the meantime, intensive one-on-one therapies that teach children how to control their movements and interact socially succeed in 30 percent to 50 percent of treated children, provided they start early, ideally by age 2 or 3.
The goal is to intercept the miswiring of the autistic brain and, as the brain is developing, help it grow the connections it needs.
Still, for a great many austistic children, the disorder is not diagnosed until age 5 or 6, when they start school, Dr.
Bristol-Power said.
Most pediatricians and family doctors still believe that autism is a relatively rare disorder and are not trained to pick up symptoms, she said.
Any child that is not speaking in short phrases by age 2 should be evaluated.
Ms. Iverson said: ``The fact that children's brains are dynamic and resilient is our greatest hope.
The very essence of a human being is his or her interaction with the environment.
If it's not done right the first time, we can make it up with restorative and regenerative therapies for the brain.
We may not make kids completely normal but we can change the course of the illness.''
A hormone trumpeted in the news media and on the Internet as a potential cure for autism worked no better than saltwater in its first controlled clinical trial, scientists are reporting.
The study, described in the issue of The New England Journal of Medicine that is being published Thursday, is one of a dozen efforts sponsored by the National Institutes of Health to test the hormone, secretin, which gained wide attention after a 3-year-old New Hampshire boy showed rapid improvement after taking the drug in 1996.
``Secretin is in widespread use across the country,'' said Dr.
Marie Bristol-Power, special assistant for autism programs at the Institute of Child Health and Human Development at the NIH.
``Parents need to know if it is promising and should be pursued or if they are being taken advantage of''.
The study was not definitive, Dr.
Bristol-Power said, and researchers will know more by the middle of next year, when other studies are completed.
Defenders of secretin were quick to denounce the new study, saying it did not give the drug a fair test.
``No one has ever claimed that secretin is a miracle cure for autism,'' said Victoria Beck, the mother of the boy who improved after taking it.
Ms. Beck, who has written a book on secretin, called the hormone ``a clue that deserves careful investigation, and not dismissal from autism gurus, who have a vested interest in the way things have been done in the past''.
Autism is a serious brain disorder that begins in infancy and prevents children from developing normally.
Symptoms, which can be mild to severe, include an inability to communicate, a refusal to make eye contact, repetitive behavior like head banging or hand flapping, and a preoccupation with unusual activities or interests.
Half a million Americans have the disorder, which is typically treated with educational and behavioral therapy.
While intensive therapy has proved effective in some patients, two-thirds of adults with autism cannot live independently.
Secretin is a hormone made in the intestine that stimulates the release of digestive fluids.
Ms. Beck's son, Parker, was given an injection to explore the cause of his chronic diarrhea.
Soon afterward, his behavior improved; he could hold still and interact better with adults.
When his story was reported on television, in newspapers and on the Internet last year, parents began clamoring to get the drug.
Dr. Bristol-Power said that the supply of secretin was soon exhausted and that a black market developed involving sham secretin, price gouging and other forms of profiteering; Ms.
Beck said that these stories were exaggerated and that no one today had any problem obtaining secretin at a fair price, which is about $200 an injection.
Anecdotes about secretin are thriving on the Internet.
Some parents report dramatic effects, others see no effect and some report that their child's symptoms have worsened.
Both sides in the secretin controversy estimate that 2,000 to 3,000 children have taken or are taking the drug.
The controlled study of secretin was led by Dr.
James Bodfish of the Western Carolina Center and the University of North Carolina, and by Dr.
Adrian Sandler of the Center for Child Development at Thoms Rehabilitation Hospital in Asheville, N.C.
In all, 56 autistic children 3 to 14 years of age took part in the study.
Half received a single injection of synthetic human secretin, and the rest were injected with saltwater.
Researchers administered a battery of behavioral tests at intervals of one day, one week and four weeks after the treatment.
Statistically, the two groups showed no differences, Sandler said.
A third of the children in both the placebo and treatment groups improved on some of the same measures.
The only explanation, Sandler said, is a ``significant placebo effect''.
``Parents are extremely invested in the possibility of new treatments and have high expectancies,'' he said.
``They are looking for subtle improvements.
Kids with autism show variability in their day-to-day behavior, and it would be easy to attribute normal variations to the secretin''.
Ms. Beck disputes this interpretation, contending that by concentrating on standard behavioral tests the researchers have failed to look at a wide range of physiological responses seen in children given secretin, and that those should be studied.
``It really bothers me that parents are portrayed as this desperate group of people with vacant minds,'' she said.
``They claim we can't tell the difference between an improvement and a mirage.
But when a child stops vomiting, sleeps through the night and makes eye contact, we know something is happening.''
BRICK, N.J.
(AP) --A federal investigation of a possible autism cluster here found that worried parents who pushed for the study were right: The neurodevelopmental disorder is far more common here than once thought.
But the investigation stopped short of finding an autism cluster, a higher-than-average rate of the disorder in an area.
Officials said there is not enough data on autism nationwide to say that a cluser exists.
The investigation did find that the water was not contaminated.
Still, a father who led the fight for the study said he's not convinced that there's no environmental cause for the high number of autism cases in Brick or the apparent increase in the disorder around the country.
''I'm slightly disappointed that (the federal experts) aren't staying in town long enough to answer the questions in the community this is going to provoke,'' said Billy Gallagher, a commercial fisherman with two autistic children, Alanna, 9, and Austin, 7.
After the most intensive federal study of autism prevalence ever conducted, researchers said Tuesday that they found a rate of 4 in 1,000 children with autism in Brick and 2.7 in 1,000 with autism-like disorders.
The rate is several times higher than past estimates, although the true rate of autism is controversial because there has never been a nationwide study.
Until the early 1990s, autism was thought to afflict 1 in 2,000 children.
Preliminary data from a just-completed federal study of children in the Atlanta area show a rate of 2-3 in 1,000 with autism.
''The major question for me is whether it's just more prevalent (than previously thought) or it's on the rise,'' as some parents and doctors suspect, said Dr.
Eric London, vice president of medical affairs at the National Alliance for Autism Research in Princeton and a consultant for the investigation.
A poorly understood disorder, autism is thought to occur early in pregnancy.
In moderate to severe cases, autism makes it difficult to communicate or relate to the outside world, and drives some to obsessively repeat certain motions, even hurt themselves or others.
Data from California, South Florida and other areas have shown a sharp increase in recent years in children receiving special educational services for autism, and parents in New York's Staten Island and other communities have complained of possible autism clusters, though no autism cluster has ever been documented.
In 1997, a group of worried Brick parents conducted a survey that found a high enough level of autism in this coastal town of 71,000 that state health officials and politicians won federal funding for a comprehensive investigation.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry began investigating in January 1999.
The CDC found 60 children ages 3 to 10 who had autism or autism-related disorders, said Jacquelyn Bertrand, a developmental psychologist at the CDC.
''I think this (study) is going to bring more and more attention to autism and the fact that it's not a rare disorder, that we need more attention to diagnosis,'' so affected children can get treatment earlier and reach a higher level of function, said Dr.
Audrey Mars, an assistant pediatrics professor at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey who examined many of the children.
----- On the Net: CDC report: http://www.cdc.gov/nceh/programs/cddh/dd/brick.htm National Alliance for Autism Research: http://www.naar.org
Autism was believed to be solely a human condition, characterized by a limited ability to communicate and a lack of response to others.
But it seems animals can be autistic too.
Neurologists have bred long-haired albino guinea pigs with the same neurological abnormalities seen in some autistic people.
With these defects in the cerebellum, the part of the brain responsible for coordination, the guinea pigs developed behavioral traits typical of autistic patients.
The team, from the Pierre and Marie Curie University in Paris, the University of Rouen and New York Medical College, placed one altered guinea pig _ known as GS _ in a cage with a normal one and compared their behavior and social interaction, such as sniffing, licking and mating attempts.
They found that the GS guinea pigs were much less inclined to interact with the other animals, and showed a reluctance to explore or respond to their surroundings _ all behavior that can be found in autistic children (European Journal of Neuroscience, vol.
10, p.
2677). Jean Caston, a member of the team, says that an animal model for autism could be useful to understand the condition better.
&QL; &UR; (This article is excerpted from New Scientist, a weekly science and technology magazine based in London).
&LR; &QC;
Gen Xers are looking for something _ or someone _ to nurture and love.
For some, it will be a baby, for others, it will be a pet or even a pet-like toy.
From Main Street to Hollywood, babies are ``in''.
Pregnant Annette Bening was the darling of the Oscars.
Jada Pinkett consistently shows up scantily clad and well rounded.
While in years past, Reese Witherspoon might have lost her star appeal by getting pregnant so young (and, oh my, out of wedlock), today's trendsetters consider her inspirational _ someone who has it all and is able to balance a family and a career.
Indeed, it's another Baby Boom, spurred by a good economy.
Babies are expensive, but Xers say they can afford them.
Also, many women are beginning to think that maybe their most important role is not in the boardroom.
We've been seeing signs of this for a while now.
Much of this trend stems from a return to more traditional values such as mom in the kitchen baking an apple pie for her brood.
One fourth of the respondents in Youth Intelligence's most recent study of 14- to 30-year-olds listed ``staying home to raise children'' as a sign of success.
And according to a recent study by the Families and Work Institute in New York City, high schoolers overwhelmingly said they wanted to land jobs that gave them time for family activities.
Behind this attitude was the fact that the majority were children of working parents and they wanted to make sure their own children came first.
But lest feminists fear that this generation is destroying all of their hard work, understand that this trend is not simply about going back to the values and customs of the '50s.
Rather, it's about Xers recognizing that it's difficult to be a good parent and that raising a teen in today's world may be harder than ever before.
Even though the ``stay-at-home'' parent of choice continues to be the woman, many of the male trendsetters surveyed by Youth Intelligence suggested that if the mother of their children had a better job than they did, they would stay home themselves.
They are just as disenchanted with the workplace as women and are even jealous of the bond a mother has with her baby.
As for women, a recent NBC News poll showed that only 14 percent of women claim to work for ``personal fulfillment'' (the rest work for financial reasons), and a study Youth Intelligence conducted for Cosmopolitan magazine revealed that 68 percent of women stated that they would stay home if they could afford to.
Having several children is also deemed a sign of success.
As a 28-year-old in New York explained, ``People are over the big houses or fancy cars.
These days it's the number of children you have Everyone knows how expensive it is to raise kids, so having more than two means you're well off And I think a woman staying home is a source of pride for a lot of men who feel proud that their wife doesn't have to work if she doesn't want to''.
The pride factor aside, you don't have to be a parent to express your need to nurture.
It's no longer unusual to see a puppy carried around in a baby papoose or brought to the office and tucked happily in the corner.
And is it just me, or is the Aibo Robodog the most endearing character in this season's cast of MTV's ``The Real World''?
From plastic Tamagotchis to puppies galore, everyone wants something to care for.
A 28-year-old in Los Angeles summed it up by saying, ``I think it's just a really hard world.
People have to be tough and on their guard so much, but you need an outlet And finding a person to love is a lot harder than finding a pet to love''.
Indeed, the need to nurture seems to extend to friends as well as canines, with trendsetters citing extreme devotion to their peers.
As one 17-year-old told us, ``I think teenagers today really take care of each other.
Not everyone has good parents, or their parents are working or whatever, so you really take care of your friends and support them''.
So, look for signs of caring all around you.
Maybe we really are becoming a ``kinder, gentler nation''.
-0- HERE TODAY Therapists Cowboy Hats Mp3's COMING TOMORROW Life coaches Berets Itags Jane Rinzler Buckingham is the president of Youth Intelligence, a market-research firm specializing in the 7- to 35-year-old market.
Her company publishes the Cassandra Report, a comprehensive survey focused on identifying emerging trends among Generations X and Why? ---- &UR; EDITORS: Visit The New York Times Syndicate Web site at http://www.nytimes.com/syndicate for more information on TREND WATCH and other features.
&QL; &UR; NONSUBSCRIBERS: To publish a ``separate-buy'' feature article, it must be purchased.
Please contact one of these sales representatives: --.S.
and Canada: DEBRA WEYDERT in New Jersey at 1-732-390-4480; fax, 732-390-4697.
--urope and Asia: KARL HORWITZ in Paris at 47-42-17-11; fax, 47-42-80-44 or 47-42-18-81; telex, 282-942.
--atin America: ANA PENA in New York, 212-499-3333; fax, 212-499-3382. &QL;
STAMFORD, Conn.
(AP) - Rabbi Joshua Hammerman made an uplifting discovery when he started searching for God on the Internet.
Hammerman, who leads Stamford's conservative Jewish congregation, Temple Beth El, tried a search by typing in ''God''.
The search reaped about 2 million hits and was the brainchild for his recently released book, ''thelordismyshepherd.com: Seeking God in Cyberspace''.
Hammerman's book explores the reasons that people are using the Internet to find faith.
He's concluded that younger generations are not rejecting God but understanding him in a different way.
''Most people of Generation X are searching for a way back to religious faith, but the forms and the metaphors some traditions use in their denominations just don't resonate with them,'' Hammerman said.
While many young people don't set foot in a church, synagogue or mosque, they may be more likely to discuss religion in a chat room or surf for Web sites where they can learn about different religions.
''The whole notion of God as the pastor leading the flock of congregations and parishes, most people now can't relate to that,'' Hammerman said.
Instead, people are identifying God with the concept of the World Wide Web, ''that God seems to be within and between us, rather than above us''.
A recent survey found that 75 percent of Internet users have engaged Web searches with religious themes.
The Internet is sometimes viewed as an alienating force, driving surfers into an artificial world and away from real human contact.
Hammerman, unlike many mainstream religious leaders, views the Internet as a vessel for improved communication between people, with the power to ''connect us in ways we've never seen before''.
Some churches and congregations, including Hammerman's, have Web sites.
In the future, prayer services will probably be available online, too, he said.
Hammerman has even married a couple who met on the Internet.
''I think there is something real happening in the virtual world,'' he said.
''The word 'religion,' in Latin, actually means 'reconnect'.
'' The book is supplemented by a Web site, aptly addressed, thelordismyshepherd.com, where surfers can read about the book and discuss it.
Hammerman, 43, has led Temple Beth El for 13 years.
He was formerly the first pulpit rabbi to be president of The Council of Churches &AMP; Synagogues of Southwestern Connecticut.
KANSAS CITY, Mo.
_ Workers decry the loss of loyalty from employers.
Employers bemoan the lack of loyalty from employees.
The truth is like that old ``Is it a breath mint or is it a candy mint''? commercial: Stop.
You're both right.
It's two, two, two truths in one.
No employer guarantees lifetime or even long-term employment.
Businesses downsize, outsource, merge, sell, reorganize, cut costs.
At the same time, workers keep their eyes open and resumes ready _ or suffer shocked self-pity when they're suddenly searching for re-employment.
This two, two, two truths in one job market underlies Carol Kinsey Goman's consultations with corporate clients.
The Berkeley, Calif.-based author and behavioral-change expert considers the loyalty factor when helping employers attract and retain employees.
At a Kansas City Institute for Management Studies seminar, Goman said employers needed to understand that workers have different perceptions of loyalty, depending on their age and experience.
Those perceptions paint different backdrops for accepting and adapting to workplace change.
Her categories and broad characteristics: The veterans: The born-before-1946 crowd has been through at least one world war and possibly a stock market crash and a major economic depression.
They respect military-model authority.
They save for a rainy day and are accustomed to delayed rewards.
They believe you're lucky to have a job at all, so hold on to it and don't complain.
The baby boomers: The postwar population bulge, born from 1946 to 1964, grew up with anti-war protests, quests for equal or civil rights, and experimentation in drugs and sexual freedom.
Their sheer numbers made tough competition for jobs and for promotions.
They question authority but, in the end, believe that in return for hard work and dedicated service, their employer will notice and reward them with boosts up the career ladder.
Generation X: The group born from 1965 to 1979 came of age in a video world where TV brought information to them fast, with fewer words and more images.
They grew up techno-savvy and are prime picks in the computer-reliant job market.
They saw vets and boomers ousted, knew the ``paternal corporation'' was history, and concentrated on building individual skills, expecting to transfer easily from job to job.
Loyalty goes to whatever project they're personally working on at the moment.
The millennials: This Generation Y, or baby boom echo, born after 1979, is the ``multitasking, twitch-speed'' generation.
Comfortable juggling many things at once and moving on quickly if bored or dissatisfied, they expect constant, instant recognition and rewards.
Accustomed to helping their families make decisions about buying computers and such, they expect a place at the corporate table when decisions are made that affect them.
They don't demand handholding career guidance; they ``want the remote control''.
Unless organizations accept the overarching age-related philosophies of their work forces, the two, two, two truths in one head-butting about loyalty will continue, and everyone will profess befuddlement about what's gone wrong.
Generation X _ that youthful, ``slacker'' generation _ is facing a quiet crisis.
The leading edge of that group is turning 30.
Time to grow up, get serious.
Time for a major identity shakeup.
Time to panic.
``We think of ourselves as not really that together and not really very grown up,'' said Kristin Beck, a Bay-area writer who hit the big 3-0 last April.
After reading up on adult development, she and colleague Lauren Dockett interviewed more than 30 women about ``lessons learned and dreams examined'' as they reached their first scary ``decade'' birthday.
The responses are woven into their book, ``Facing 30: Women Talk About Constructing a Real Life and Other Scary Rites of Passage'' (New Harbinger Publications, 163 pages, $12.95).
Beck and Dockett uncovered rampant angst among their peers, who believed they had little to show for themselves as they entered serious adulthood.
Lingering in school, putting off marriage, flitting from job to job, they panicked as they saw their adolescence stretch like cheap pantyhose.
Many worried they were living a kind of ``adulthood lite''.
``Women pretty uniformly said their identity was shaken at the end of their 20s,'' Beck said.
``Love and career and babies: Those are the big things''.
Many women believed self-imposed deadline pressure to have their lives tidily arranged _ right now.
When things didn't gel, they believed the problem lay with them, not their expectations.
``I think the biggest unrealistic expectation,'' Beck said, ``is that you have to achieve everything by 30''.
Graying baby boomers may snort at the thought of Gen-Xers wringing their smooth, unlined hands over the trauma of aging, but Beck says ix-nay on the condescension.
``Especially when you're facing 50, 30 looks pretty good,'' she concedes.
``But like it or not, it is a significant developmental period in a woman's life.
If you don't take a look at stuff in your 30s, you might end up with a big, fat midlife crisis''.
Gen-Xers grew up in a different climate than their elders, so turning 30 feels slightly different for them.
Baby boomers _ who coined the phrase, ``Don't trust anyone over 30'' _ may have suffered some chagrin when age pushed them into the enemy camp.
But their choices in life were fairly straightforward, Beck said.
They could either conform to traditional roles or rebel against them.
Generation X, on the other hand, is coming of age with no clear sense of identity.
Everything is up for grabs.
``Now there aren't even rules to be broken,'' Beck said.
``It's so free-form, it's stultifying''.
She sees Gen-X as a cautious, media-saturated bunch who grew up without illusions.
Stung by their parents' divorces, the women she met are nervous about commitment, even if they see marriage as a desirable goal.
With far less job security than their parents had, they view career choice as something malleable, less defining.
``That's basically our generation in a nutshell _ many, many different kinds of jobs before settling into a career,'' Beck said.
``The idea is grab what you can get.
We have grown up in a pretty screwy economy and nothing seems very secure''.
Although women are having babies later in life, they still feel pressure to get moving on the issue _ at least make up their minds _ by age 30, Beck said.
If they want children, their tendency is to dump lackluster relationships at around this age and start scouting for more promising, long-term partners.
Beck senses a backlash against the mantra that women can have it all _ high-octane career, marriage and family.
``We're really grateful to our mothers for paving the way for us,'' she said, ``but I do think that having it all means you're sacrificing something.
``A lot of women we talked to wanted to stay home with their kids _ wanted to _ and considered themselves feminists''.
Beck, who grew up as a latchkey kid, said she works full time out of economic necessity but would rather be home with her 2-month-old baby.
``I think a lot of women are trying to figure out a way to work half-time and keep themselves in the career loop and pay attention to their kids,'' she said.
The younger women Beck interviewed saw 30 as a great divide between the carefree, adventurous possibilities of youth and the drudgery of maturity.
``People basically thought you'd be set in your ways, you'd be calcified, you'd have to give up facets of your personality you weren't ready to give up,'' Beck said.
In reality, turning 30 seldom lived down to their expectations.
Women who had already passed that milestone said they felt more sure-footed and fully formed.
They also felt less pressure to strive for impossible standards of beauty.
Beck said their philosophy was, ``No one's going to ever buy you as a young person anymore, so you might as well give it up''.
Middle-age women said it's OK to hit 30 without all the answers.
In hindsight, they saw it as a jumping-off point for adulthood _ a time to move forward with greater confidence and really start living.
``You just know yourself better when you turn 30,'' Beck said, adding that she learned to lighten up after talking to these women.
``I don't have to wrap things up right this second,'' she decided.
``If I'm not happy in my career, I have a whole lifetime to figure it out.
I don't feel I have to have everything solved''.
Now, she added, ``30 seems like an exciting possibility instead of a big bummer.''
Slackers and Generation X types, it seems, are hardly slack when it comes to saving for retirement.
According to a recent survey, people between the ages of 18 and 39 began saving for retirement at an average age of 25.
That is a far earlier starting age than for older groups, the survey found: People between the ages of 40 and 64 began saving for retirement at an average age of 35, and those 65 and older waited until they were 46.
Louis Harris &AMP; Associates surveyed 1,000 adults in June for Alliance Capital Management, the money management firm in New York.
But young savers, who can generally afford to invest most aggressively because they don't need the money for many years, are proving oddly conservative in investment choices.
The poll found that only 46 percent of people aged 18 to 29 were using stocks or stock or bond funds in their retirement investing.
And young investors who do own stocks or funds devote only 35 percent of their portfolios to them, on average.
By comparison, 62 percent of those aged 30 to 49 have invested money in stocks or mutual funds.
And these people are putting a greater portion of their money _ 51 percent _ into such investments.
The survey also found that 56 percent of those aged 50 to 64 held stocks or mutual funds; on average, these investors also devoted 51 percent of their portfolios to them.
``We were fascinated that Gen X-ers would start saving regularly for retirement earlier than their elders did but keep less of their assets in more aggressive investments,'' said John Carifa, president of Alliance.
The survey also found that retirement savers didn't think they were stashing away enough money.
In estimating how much money they would need to retire with an income equal to 70 percent of what they now earned, the respondents gave a median answer of $196,000.
But the median amount they actually expected to save was just $143,000, a 27 percent shortfall.
This week, when astronaut John Glenn straps himself into the shuttle Discovery, younger Americans will marvel at the achievements of this 77-year-old hero.
He's been a combat pilot, space pioneer, political leader and family man.
He embodies the best about his gritty generation, the one that triumphed in World War II and then built the world's greatest economy.
But don't let the glowing descriptions you'll hear from young TV reporters lead you to believe that goodwill toward older Americans is universal.
Despite the family ties that bind us, the different generations seem to be growing apart as jealousy and economic conflict drive wedges between the various age groups.
Many members of Glenn's generation believe they are losing ground financially now.
At the same time, their children are getting sick of paying high taxes to support Social Security.
And Generation Xers are afraid the baby boomers ahead of them soon will create such a huge voting bloc of retirees that Congress will be pushed to further boost taxes to support the elderly.
Each generation has some legitimate gripes and fears.
Today's over-65 Americans are frustrated because they are seeing their income decline at a time when younger people are flourishing.
While jobs are plentiful and mortgages cheap for workers in the prime of life, retirees are getting pinched by a meager 1.3 percent cost-of-living increase in Social Security payments and a continuing decline in the interest rates paid on savings.
With their incomes stagnant or shrinking, many older Americans are getting angry with their children.
They resent seeing younger generations buying bigger homes and cars.
``I've never known a more self-indulgent, self-absorbed, self-centered generation as the baby boomers,'' one reader said in a recent letter to me.
A jealous 69-year-old parent wrote: ``My first home had 1,200 square feet.
My daughter's home today is over 3,000, as are most of the homes being built in north Fulton, where I still have a tiny, one-story ranch home with wood siding''.
But while senior citizens are complaining about ``selfish'' children, boomers are getting fed up with the kvetching of their parents, who are getting far more out of Social Security than they put into it.
In the 1950s, the combined payroll tax for Social Security, paid by both workers and their employers, was just 6 percent.
Today, the combined tax is 12.4 percent.
The World War II generation had nowhere near the tax burden that today's workers carry to fund benefits for aging veterans, Social Security, Medicare and other programs for the elderly.
Largely because of that government aid, the elderly are the wealthiest demographic group in America.
But perhaps no generation has more to fear from their elders than Generation X, the people born from the mid-1960s to the late 1970s.
Those young workers are vastly outnumbered by the boomers who were born between 1946 and 1964.
GenXers may find themselves suffocated by much higher taxes to care for long-living boomers.
Economists estimate that to maintain today's level of Social Security benefits, workers in 2020 will have to shoulder a 20 percent payroll tax.
In 1999, Congress is supposed to take up Social Security reform.
The arguments could get very ugly as each generation tries to cut a better deal for itself.
For decades, the most bitter battles in American social and political life were over race.
In coming years, the most hostile debates may be over what one generation owes another.
Discussions around the table at Thanksgiving may get a lot livelier in the next century.
Marilyn Geewax is a member of The Atlanta Constitution editorial board.
E-mail: mgeewax(AT)ajc.com Story Filed By Cox Newspapers For Use By Clients of the New York Times News Service
DAYTON, Ohio _ When scores of the state's behind-the-scenes politicos showed up in Columbus last month to schmooze at the annual Ohio Board of Elections Association conference, the Montgomery County contingent stood out like a Brownie troop at a senior citizens ball.
``We would go into these hospitality suites and people would look at us and say, `What's going on in Montgomery County?
These people are so young,' '' said Nan Whaley, who at age 24 is both executive director of the county's Democratic Party and a member of the local Board of Elections.
Joining Whaley at the convention was her mirror image in Montgomery County politics _ 27-year-old John Shaw, the executive director of the local Republican Party _ who, like Whaley, holds a patronage job as a member of the election board.
Supporting the two young party execs is a growing cadre of 20-something and early 30-something political workers who are giving the lie _ at least in the Dayton area _ to the notion that Generation X is a bunch of slackers who would rather whine about societal problems than fix them.
The youth infusion has meant ``more pep and vigor in the party in the last three to four years than in a long time,'' said James E.P.
``Sully'' Sullivan, 79, a longtime local Democratic Party player and a former director of the Montgomery County Board of Elections.
In typical partisan fashion, the two parties each claim to be the Pied Piper of the local youth movement.
``We have about 100 Young Democrats in Montgomery County.
They have three Young Republicans,'' Whaley sniffed.
``There is no organized Young Republicans in Montgomery County''.
Shaw begged to differ.
The Democrats ``may have a stronger organization, but we have just as many strong young people'' in the local Republican ranks.
``Just going to club meetings doesn't mean you're active''.
RECRUITING THE YOUNG Montgomery County Democratic Chairman Dennis Lieberman said he got the ball rolling across the generations here in 1996, soon after the overthrow of former chairman Joe Shump and the old Democratic guard, by resurrecting the College Democrats Club at the University of Dayton.
The club's growing membership was then invited to join the county Young Democrats and put to work within the local party structure.
``Word got out that we cared about young people and that we tried to get them involved in things,'' Lieberman said.
``As a result, we got lucky and ended up with some very good young people''.
The list includes Whaley; Charlie Bowling, 29, who helped rebuild the Young Democrat organization here; Troy Singer, 34, who ran Tony Hill's top vote-getting campaign last fall for the Dayton school board; and Hill himself, 31, who started out as an adviser to U.S.
Rep. Tony Hall, R-Dayton.
Jeff Jacobson, chairman of the Montgomery County Republican Party, says local Republicans have done their own trolling for youth, primarily by changing the way the party recruits and promotes its workers.
It's no longer who you know, or how long you've paid party dues, Jacobson said.
Now it's what you know.
``We started recruiting young people right out of college that we think have talent,'' he said.
The Republican kiddie list now includes Shaw; Chris Heizer, 27, director of the Montgomery County Board of Elections and vice president of the local Republican Party executive committee; Doug Tully, 29, supervisor of the Board of Elections and a member of the local Republican committee; and Jon Husted, 32, who is running for the 41st District seat in the Ohio House of Representatives being vacated by J.
Donald Mottley, R-West Carrollton.
FROM ENVELOPE-STUFFING TO COMPUTER PROGRAMMING Interestingly, while the Democrats tend to talk about the youthful vision and energy that Generation X has brought to party politics, Republicans are more likely to tout their technical and organizational skills.
Menial tasks such as typing addresses, stuffing envelopes and tallying votes used to be the drudgery that greased the political machine, They were often assigned to armies of senior citizens with plenty of time on their hands.
Now it's all done by computer.
``So we get bright young people who can take apart a computer and put it back together again,'' said Susan Finley, co-chair of the Montgomery County Republican Party who also sits on the Board of Elections.
At age 68, Finley calls herself the ``house mother'' of the local election board.
Susan Mitchell, author of ``Generation X: The Young Adult Market'' (New Strategist, $69.95), said it's unusual for Dayton to have so many young people involved in local politics, especially party politics.
``The thing that is most striking about this generation is that they tend not to identify with any political party,'' she said.
The young pols in both parties worry that too many of their peers continue to be alienated from the political process.
``I think it's just immaturity,'' Singer said.
``As we grow older, we become more aware of how people in office can affect our paychecks because of taxes that are taken out, how they can affect the economy and jobs that are available''.
Kate Evans, a 19-year-old member of UD's Young Democrats, says many of her classmates are apathetic about the political scene because they are confident that good jobs are waiting for them after graduation.
``I think a lot of people my age feel very comfortable, almost complacent,'' Evans said.
``But how long is this (prosperity) going to last''?
Whaley says that for many Gen-Xers, the bad times are already here, but younger voters aren't getting the message.
``Most of my generation is underemployed and don't have good (employee) benefits.
But they don't equate that with the ballot box''.
POLITICS OFTEN RUNS IN THE BLOOD The Gen-Xers involved in local politics most often credited their families for their interest in political careers.
Whaley cites the inspiration of her mother, who also was active as a Young Democrat and who later ran for a number of local and state offices in Indiana, including state auditor.
Her mother most recently won election as clerk-treasurer of Mooresville, Ind.
, in 1996.
Singer's uncle, Enos Singer, was a past president of the Ohio Board of Elections Association and a longtime veteran of statehouse politics.
His grandfather, Kenneth Singer, was a trustee for many years in Monroe County in southeastern Ohio.
For others, national leaders provided the inspiration to enter politics.
``My first interest started with Ronald Reagan. . . because he made us proud to be Americans again,'' Shaw said.
``I've been reading presidential biographies ever since''.
Both the Democrat and Republican youth squads concurred that Montgomery County's evenly divided vote, and often hotly contested races, is the challenge that drew them into local party politics.
``Young people have plenty of opportunities to work in Columbus or (Washington) D.C., but Dayton is fun,'' Whaley said.
``It's the number one swing county (for elections) in the state.
Every race is a real fight here.
People can win on 400 votes out of 50,000 cast''.
Shaw agreed.
``It's an exciting county.
Franklin and Hamilton are mostly Republican.
Toledo and Cleveland are mostly Democrat.
But this is just a good 50/50 county with a lot of contested races''.
They may teasingly call each other R's and D's, but the young politicos here insist the rivalry only brings them closer socially.
On election night last year, the kiddie corps from both parties went out to celebrate together.
``Do we argue?
Oh yeah,'' Shaw said.
``But it's all in fun.
Nobody ever gets upset about it because we all know where everybody is coming from before we get there''.
If Gen-Xers shy away from politics, Shaw puts at least part of the blame on the system itself.
``I think, frankly, they want to see more candidates their own age to relate to,'' he said.
`I PUT MY MONEY WHERE MY MOUTH WAS' So far, most of the young pols here have been content to work behind the scenes as campaign workers, strategists and committee members.
But many are itching to run for office and some, like 31-year-old Tony Hill, already have.
After serving for several years as a campaign worker for other local candidates, Hill ran for Dayton school board last fall and nabbed the most votes in the race.
``I didn't want to be one of those who just complained about things going wrong,'' he said.
``I kind of put my money where my mouth was''.
Too often, the younger generation is blamed for not being engaged in politics ``when the real problem is that the political system has failed to engage them,'' said Gen-X expert Mitchell.
``Older people do things out of a civic obligation _ you vote because you're supposed to,'' she said.
``But younger people aren't going to vote because of that.
You have to give them something to vote for, give them something to get excited about''.
Term limits may help create some of that excitement in the statehouse.
``You don't have to be there for 10 years before getting into a position of standing, because everyone is limited to eight years anyway,'' said Husted, citing one of the reasons he decided to run for Mottley's vacated seat.
Hill said political leaders can't wait too long before unleashing other Gen-X candidates, or they'll lose young voters completely.
``I think it's time to start looking at our generation _ not just on the school board, but to serve downtown on the (city) commission and in the statehouse as well,'' he said.
``I think we have some outstanding young people in the city.
We need to make sure we're growing these people for elections down the road''.
Story Filed By Cox Newspapers For Use By Clients of the New York Times News Service
Service &LR; &QC; &QL; SANTA ROSA, Calif.
_ Seven years ago three guys named Sebastiani, Sangiacomo and Bundschu got together over beers at a Sonoma pub to lament the sorry state of wine drinking in America.
The young men, all scions of prominent Sonoma Valley wine families, were particularly disturbed about the wine-drinking habits of their own generation.
The common wisdom was that members of so-called Generation X preferred margaritas to merlot and considered wine to be elitist, boring and passe.
The beers kept flowing and the conversation became more impassioned _ after all, family fortunes and life styles were at stake.
The grape heirs decided they had to do something to make wine cool for the cyber generation or else the party could be over.
The Wine Brats, now a national movement with 16,000 members, was born following that sudsy night of brainstorming.
In the beginning, the Wine Brats was just the three young men armed with an ambitious goal: to knock wine off its lofty pedestal.
The idea was to make wine fun, accessible and relevant to a generation skeptical of glitz, glamour and glad-handing sales pitches.
Their mantra was ``Wine for the People''.
``Our message was, wine doesn't have to be pretentious,'' said Wine Brat Jeff Bundschu, 31, a sixth-generation Sonoma Valley vintner who is now general manager of his family's Gundlach-Bundschu Winery in Vineburg.
``You don't have to drink it out of crystal glasses and it can fit into your lifestyle and, by the way, it goes great with pizza and burgers''.
Bundschu teamed with childhood pals Mike Sangiacomo, 31, of Sangiacomo Vineyards, and Jon Sebastiani, 29, of Viansa Winery, to found the Wine Brats in 1993.
The name fit.
Growing up, they and other privileged children of wealthy winemakers were fondly called wine brats by their families and members of the community.
The trendy group created an energy of its own, spreading like morning glory in a vineyard.
Wine Brats now has 45 chapters throughout the country, with Chicago and New York leading Brat enclaves.
Brats converge at wine raves where cabernet and merlot are savoured in a multimedia blowouts with art, music, food and technology.
They attend seminars on how to pair wine with popcorn, corn chips and salsa while big screen television sets play reruns of ``Happy Days''.
From its humble beginnings in the Sonoma pub, Wine Brats has become an Internet-based collective of young wine enthusiasts, with the organization's core age group 24 to 36.
They have even written a book: ``The Wine Brats' Guide to Living With Wine,'' published by St.
Martin's Griffin of New York.
The original Wine Brats are now older than many of the members who have jumped on their fast-moving wine train.
They also are busier than they were seven years ago when all three were single, footloose and just embarking on careers at family wineries and vineyards.
Today, all three Wine Brats are married, and Bundschu and Sangiacomo each have a child.
All say their family obligations and wine jobs are demanding, limiting the time they have to raid Gen X hangouts to pour pinot noir.
``I'm finding it extremely difficult to juggle my personal life and my professional role at Viansa.
The last few years have been very busy,'' said Sebastiani, who is now president of Viansa Winery, the winery and Italian marketplace owned by his parents, Sam and Vicki Sebastiani.
Mike Sangiacomo is now the ranch manager at his family's Sangiacomo Vineyards, one of Sonoma County's premier grape producers.
Most of the Wine Brats' 16,000 members are young, affluent urban consumers wired to the Web.
They prefer high-energy parties _ rather than sedate sippings _ to sample wine.
``One of the things we've always stressed is that wine is an agricultural product,'' said Bundschu.
``It comes from the earth and is dependent on weather.
It's real, healthy and doesn't have to be complicated''.
That goes hand-in-hand with young peoples' demand for simplicity, intelligence and a healthy nonchalance.
Wine Brats does not want people to increase their alcohol consumption, just their beverage of choice.
The group's motto is: ``Drink less, drink better''.
Although Sebastiani, Sangiacomo and Bundschu remain on the Wine Brats' board of directors, they are not as involved as they were in the early days.
The other two members of the Wine Brats' board of directors are Dawn Dooley, formerly of Duckhorn Vineyards in the Napa Valley and now with Hedges Cellars in Washington, and Mimi Gatens of Vine Cliff Winery in Napa.
The Wine Brats directors hold board meetings via e-mail.
The organization's day-to-day operation is done by a paid staff headed by executive director Joel Quigley, who has held the position since 1995.
Quigley, 38, uses the Internet and his staff's youthful energy to spread the word about wine and build membership.
Working with Quigley out of the Wine Brats' Santa Rosa office are six full-time staff members and seven interns from the wine business program at Sonoma State University.
Wine Brats has become a think tank for the wine industry, he said, evaluating trends and assessing wine's place in changing lifestyles.
``We have no constraints, which allows us to think outside the box and run with our ideas,'' Quigley said.
Technically, Wine Brats is an acronym _ Wine to Benefit Responsible Adults for Tomorrow's Society _ but few people, even the Brats themselves, ever use it.
More than 50 wineries and wine industry groups contribute to the Wine Brats budget, which this year is approaching $1 million.
The Wine Institute, a trade group based in San Francisco, provided $10,000 in seed money to launch the Wine Brats.
``If our mission is to convert the unconverted, then television and mainstream media are where we have to be seen,'' said Sebastiani.
``Young adults who don't drink wine, don't read wine publications.
It's that simple''.
Quigley and the Wine Brats have ambitious plans, dreaming of new venues, bigger crowds and greater influence.
There are still many tequila drinkers to convert to the joys of cabernet and zinfandel, Quigley said.
``We're not stopping,'' said Sebastiani, ``until Dennis Rodman is sucking down chardonnay''.
(Tim Teconi writes for The Press Democrat in Santa Rosa, Calif.
The Press Democrat is part of the New York Times Regional Newspaper Group.)
KANSAS CITY, Mo.
_ ``What could it be this time''?
Kevin Mallot thought when Peter Mallouk sent him e-mail about going out to lunch.
The two Generation X-ers had been buddies for four years, long enough for Mallot to expect the unexpected, like being a model for a book about kissing.
So there they sat at a Westport bagel shop, munching matching turkey sandwiches, when the then-29-year-old Mallouk broached his next scheme.
``I want to start a charity,'' he told Mallot.
Mallot swallowed his food, leaned back and laughed.
After all, they were well-paid businessmen, certainly not millionaires.
Then a few minutes later, Mallot agreed to join the charity's board _ and last summer they joined a burgeoning philanthropic movement.
Charity isn't just for retired folks anymore.
Young professionals are pursuing philanthropy now, and they're taking a different approach to giving than old-line tycoons such as a Rockefeller or even a Kemper.
The new donors give their expertise, not just their money.
They are getting directly involved with a cause, applying the same hands-on management style they brought to their professions.
So instead of putting their names on a building, they want something else: Results.
Dalene Bradford of the Greater Kansas City Community Foundation and Affiliated Trusts calls this phenomenon a ``new style of donor''.
Peter Karoff with a Boston-based philanthropic consulting firm calls it ``a new kind of philanthropy''.
And Paul Schervish, one of the nation's foremost sociologists of the rich, calls it ``a sea change in the dynamics of charitable giving''.
For Mallouk and Mallot, their cause involved rounding up 11 more pals, creating a charitable fund at the community foundation and then acting like venture capitalists in picking an investment.
They decided to create a child-safety program.
Now they're raising $1 million, creating a curriculum and coordinating construction themselves.
Recently the group _ calling itself KC CAN, for Kansas City Children's Assistance Network _ gained its first sizable pledge, $100,000 from a local foundation.
Here and across the country, this new kind of philanthropy is being driven by new wealth.
This is an era of initial public offerings, surging stock portfolios, business buyouts and baby-boomer inheritances.
Each day, it seems, produces more instant millionaires.
Kansas City has become a hotbed for the new philanthropy.
The city's community foundation has led the nation in the amount of new gifts.
That is because the foundation is tailored toward the new style of donor.
Taking a chance It was Christmastime when Peter and Veronica Mallouk had one of those unplanned husband-wife chats that turned their lives in a different direction.
They were driving along Linwood Boulevard, headed back to south Overland Park, Kan.
, from a party.
The gathering had been for New Horizons Assistance Corp.
, which cares for mentally disabled adults.
Veronica had recruited volunteers from her job at Andersen Consulting in Overland Park to serve the food.
Peter had been the deejay.
It had gone well.
So well that New Horizons officials had asked both to join their board.
Should they?
That's what they discussed that December night in 1998.
Veronica had been a volunteer as long as she could remember: March of Dimes walk-a-thons as a kid.
Teaching Sunday school in college.
Organizing charity events at work.
``You already do a lot,'' Peter told his wife.
``I want to do more,'' she replied.
The Mallouks asked 15 friends, such as Mallot, 27.
They included an investment adviser, an architect, a teacher and some technology consultants at Andersen Consulting.
Almost all agreed.
Peter Mallouk then started researching how to put together a charitable board.
By chance, he was steered to the local community foundation.
The organization had spent the past few years reinventing itself.
It had found a niche as a sort of middleman for donors, setting up meetings with financial advisers and with possible beneficiaries.
Donor funds rolled in.
During the 1990s the number of new funds jumped sixfold, to 550.
New contributions jumped tenfold.
Two years ago the foundation reached $120 million _ the most money received by any community foundation in the country that year.
It topped that last year with $142.8 million.
The foundation doesn't track whether funds come from estates or Gen X-ers, but officials estimate that one-fifth of contributions reflect the new style of giving.
There's Kent Humphrey.
He spent 18 months taking care of his wife, who had a brain tumor.
After she died in 1998, he started a fund to pay for things caregivers like him didn't have time for, such as cleaning the house.
Now he's promoting the concept to doctors.
There's Tom Brown.
His mother, Virginia, grew up with crooked teeth, but her parents could not afford braces for her.
Eventually Virginia got them, and late in life she set up a fund to pay for children's orthodontic work.
Now Brown, a local attorney, screens applications and makes doctor appointments.
And there's Cynthia Gunn.
The local television anchor and reporter set up a fund to pay for daylong self-help seminars.
They're geared toward high school freshman girls in Kansas City to coach them about careers, health and relationships.
She organizes the seminars every year.
These new donors have old reasons for giving: passion; prestige; politics; even tax breaks.
But they have new causes, tipping the balance of the community foundation's grants.
The percentage going to the arts has climbed, thanks to funds set aside for Science City at Union Station, while those going toward health have dipped.
Still, the average fund the community foundation manages is $500,000.
Most are under $100,000.
That's not much compared with what some lesser-known instant millionaires are doing elsewhere.
Nicholas Lovejoy of Seattle was the fifth employee in the door at Amazon.com and now, at age 30, he's overseeing a $2.5 million foundation with his wife.
Trish Millines Dziko, who also lives on the West Coast, quit Microsoft after eight years and founded an organization devoted to teaching African-Americans about computers.
And on and on.
Philanthropic networks are popping up all over to deal with this phenomenon.
``Lots of people with modest sums are doing this,'' said Karoff, president of the Philanthropic Initiative in Boston.
``There's a yearning on the part of donors for values and a greater sense of community.
``It's part of a search for meaning in our lives that is going on''.
The right cause Peter Mallouk and his board were searching, too.
For a cause.
They had money going from paychecks toward their fund.
They had a name picked out, focusing on children.
But still no cause.
``We were in a panic at one point,'' Mallouk said.
The community foundation invited him to a meeting at Children's Mercy Hospital.
Mallouk arrived and immediately received a tour.
He was shown different equipment that had been donated.
After the tour Denise Dowd, medical director for the hospital's childhood safety center, made a presentation.
She recited the hospital's commitment to redesigning playground equipment, speaking at schools, creating a mock street where kids learn how to be safe.
They didn't have the time or money for that mock street yet, but...
Hold it right there, Mallouk thought.
That's it.
He took it back to his board.
Members were all for it.
They pledged to build what's called Safety Street, a full-size indoor reproduction of an actual city street, with working traffic lights, cars, buses and bikes.
It's based on an existing program in New York City and teaches children what to do and not do on a street.
Mallouk's board is doing all the planning: John Taylor is hatching the building plan; Mike Keegan is making fund-raising pitches; Kurt Hogan is creating a Web site; Elise Barton is developing the teaching lessons.
``Sometimes, something like the United Way is a little bit frustrating,'' Barton said.
``You have a one-day involvement (in filling out a form), but you don't see where your money is going.
The greater reward is getting to participate''.
The Kansas City Health Department has donated land at 24th and Campbell streets.
Safety Street is scheduled to open there in the fall of 2001.
MEXICO CITY _ While members of Mexico's latest generation of student revolutionaries are known to quote Karl Marx, they also sport dreadlocks and are more likely than not to have some parts of their bodies pierced.
They flaunt hair colors that range from fluorescent marine-green to a bold stripe of spray-paint red.
Yet they see themselves in the tradition of Cuba's Che Guevara or Mexico's Subcomandante Marcos.
If this were a Hollywood script, it might be tagged ``Emilio Zapata meets Generation X''.
Indeed, among the thousands of idealistic students involved in one of the biggest university protests here since the late 1960s, many now believe that what started out as a fight over an increase in tuition can be transformed into a left-wing movement that will reach far beyond the confines of campus politics.
Whether the rest of Mexico will go along is another question.
``For me, this is a social movement,'' said Ana Paula Lira, a 19-year-old dentistry student, as she stood guard at the gate of one of the now-barricaded entrances to the vast Mexico City campus of the National Autonomous University of Mexico, or UNAM.
Inside, striking students have turned classrooms into dormitories and kitchens.
Late into the night, they play chess and talk politics.
During the days, they hold protests, teach children's theater and modern dance in their own open university, and try to convince commuters on buses and the city's subway that there is something fundamentally wrong with the direction Mexico is going on the cusp of the 21st century.
``We just don't want to change the university _ what we want is a social movement that will help the people,'' Lira said.
The protest has shut down Latin America's largest university for more than 3 months and forced most of its 276,000 students and 30,000 professors to go off campus for classes.
Frustrated university officials finally canceled the spring semester earlier this month.
But as a social movement, the strike has a particular problem: Nobody, including the strikers, seems to know exactly what they want.
Unlike the Zapatista uprising in Chiapas, which initially drew wide sympathy from the left and the country's urban poor, Mexican society has an ambivalent relationship with its new revolutionaries.
Polls suggest that the majority of Mexicans don't approve of the strike.
Talks between university officials and the students have broken down repeatedly.
Officials now say they will no longer even sit down with the strike leaders until the students promise to abandon the campus that they have occupied since April.
``They're only hurting themselves,'' said Maria Isabel Castro, a 76-year-old grandmother, as she tended a market stand in the city's center.
``I say the ones who want to study should study and the rest, throw them out in the street''.
Even so, nearly everyone has been surprised by the determination of the students and a capacity to organize that has repeatedly brought supportive crowds of thousands into the capital's streets and the university's main square.
The strike appears to have tapped the frustration of a generation that has grown up as Mexico has stumbled from one economic crisis to another.
Real wages have dropped dramatically since the early 1980s, analysts say, and the inequality gap that separates rich from poor has grown.
``This is a moment when some sectors of society feel alienated, and the youth are reacting to that,'' said Sergio Aguayo, a political analyst.
``Forty to 50 percent of this country lives in poverty''.
That may explain why the strikers didn't stop June 7, when the university's president gave in to their primary demand and withdrew his proposal for a mandatory increase in fees from the current equivalent of about 2 cents per semester _ effectively free _ to about $150.
The students had won, but they had also captured the public pulpit and seemed unwilling to give it up.
They have added several more demands, including a restructuring of how the university is governed.
But it is also clear from interviews with students and their faculty supporters that many hope the strike can spark a nationwide political movement that can connect with workers, primary and secondary school teachers, and other universities _ invigorating the country's left in a grand, grass-roots coalition.
``One of the engines of democratization in the country over the last 30 years has been the public university.
That's what you're seeing now _ the university moving to recapture this national role,'' said Carola Garcia Calderon, a professor of communication in the faculty of political and social sciences, which has served as the movement's nerve center.
Yet not much agreement has emerged on what this larger movement ought to be about.
Recent protests have lashed out against targets as varied as the World Bank, Mexico's stock market, the country's news media, the United States and university entrance exams.
``They don't have a clear message, and the image that they are projecting of themselves is quite radical,'' Aguayo said.
``In a way, this is a nostalgic moment.
They are trying to appeal to a Mexico that no longer exists''.
Most analysts say confused goals and apparent intransigence will limit the students' capacity to expand their following.
Internal splits are already forming.
After weeks of brewing dissent, a sizable group of students broke ranks July 18 over the issue of whether they should hand over the campus to help restart negotiations.
In the end, the most significant thing about the students' uprising may be that they can shut down a massive university, march in the streets, hand ultimatums to government negotiators and, through it all, give the authorities little choice but to stand by and wait it out.
It's a dramatic contrast to Mexico's leftist student movement of 1968 that ended when federal troops opened fire on the protesters in a square, killing, by one estimate, nearly 200.
Private papers of the general who was Mexico's secretary of defense at the time were made public last month.
The documents show that members of the presidential bodyguard team fired on the students and that the order came directly from the president, Gustavo Diaz Ordaz, something long denied by successive governments.
This time around, such intervention would be hard to imagine in a Mexico obsessed with its international image and securing a role in the global economy.
The army has said it will not intervene.
Authorities have not ruled out police action, but a recent poll in the daily Reforma indicates that while public opinion does not support the strike, it is also overwhelmingly against using force to stop it.
With the most competitive presidential election in the country's modern history shaping up for next year, observers say direct intervention would present too much of a political risk for the government of President Ernesto Zedillo.
``The police aren't entering to retake the campus because no one in the government is prepared to pay the consequences of even a single student dying,'' said Denise Maerker, the host of a TV interview program.
``Nineteen sixty-eight was another Mexico, another society altogether''.
&QL; XXXXX &QL; &QL; Photos to accompany this story are available from free-lance photographer Keith Dannemiller in Mexico City.
He can be contacted via email at keithyviet(at)solar.sar.net &QL; &QL; XXXX END OF STORY &QL;
It's the day you've either been dreading or, perhaps, secretly awaiting _ the day your baby graduates from high school and leaves home or maybe comes home again after college.
But whether you're weeping with joy or despair, the gift you give is a great way of showing your grad how well you understand his or her angst and ambitions.
Youth Intelligence recently asked more than 1,000 high school and college seniors what they'd like for graduation.
Not surprisingly, the most common requests were for the newest technology, but there were still a few desired items that don't need a manual.
Here are some of the hottest gifts on the Gen-X hit list.
PORTABLE DVD PLAYER The No.
1 requested gift (other than cash) was a portable DVD player.
Portable DVD players run on batteries and can go anywhere.
I've even seen people in New York City walking down the street watching a movie.
At a list price of approximately $1,000, this is a costly purchase, but one I know your grad will love.
DIGITAL CAMERA When it comes to capturing graduation memories, today's seniors won't settle for old-fashioned photos.
More than 65 percent of the respondents we surveyed wanted a digital camera.
While most adults can't turn one on, the next generations can have a picture cropped, re-colored and e-mailed to their classmates before you say cheese.
Plan to spend between $300 and $1,500 to make your grad happy.
MOBILE PHONE Whether your grad is switching apartments, traveling or just avoiding the prying eyes of parents, Gen X considers the personal phone a necessity.
Although Nokia ruled the roost with ther sleek, silver version, Motorola's V series, just out a few months and priced at around $500, is gaining steam.
Hipsters in Los Angeles and New York carry them, and grads crave the streamlined size and Internet access.
Before you buy any phone, make sure that your grad's phone carrier can use it _ though if a particular model is a ``must have,'' your grad may prefer to switch carriers.
SPORTY KICKS (shoes, that is) Air Prestos are the coolest shoes in town.
When I recently wore a pair to a high school in Los Angeles, I was mobbed by teens who wanted them, and one offered me twice the retail price ($85).
Nike is a trailblazer once again.
These athletic shoes weigh almost nothing (which makes them easy to pack) but provide support and comfort (which suits the adventurous athlete).
It doesn't hurt that they come in a dazzling array of colors.
CHARM BRACELET You might have purchased one of these for your daughter on her fifth birthday and you'd swear she misplaced it by her seventh.
Chances are you'll soon see it emerge from the depths of her dresser.
Charm bracelets are back big time.
Young people hunger for some of the things that previously brought them comfort.
In addition, charms provide ultimate individualization.
Each one tells a story.
PERSONALIZED STATIONERY In a world of technology and gadgets, instant messaging and e-mails, young people are telling me that when it really counts, they'd rather write a letter.
Elaborate papers (translucent, in unique shapes or with pressed flowers,) help them feel that they're sending something special.
SUMMER STUFF Sooner or later your grad will head to the beach and this is a great way to buy a gift that isn't too expensive.
Of course stylish sunners won't settle for plain old beach towels (so pre-senior).
Instead, they have their eyes on a beach mat.
The most coveted are from a company called Inca (I saw some hot versions at Fred Segal in Santa Monica a couple of weeks ago), which also have matching straw bags.
When it comes to sunglasses, you can't go wrong with aviators.
The coolest ones are from Stussy and Chloe, but XOXO offers a less expensive version.
The hippest lenses are burgundy, but make sure they have strong UVA/UVB protection as often the tinted lenses don't provide it.
CYBER MONEY If you still don't know what to get, let your grad decide.
Buy some online money from CyberMoola.com, Flooze.com or Internetcash.com.
Each of these sites has multiple online stores from which the recipient can choose.
&UR; -0- &QL; &UR; Here Today/Coming Tomorrow &LR; &QL; &UR; Here Today Malcolm in the Middle Self-tanners Jelly watch &UR; Coming Tomorrow M.Y.O.B Bronzers Gel candles &UR; -0- &QL; Jane Rinzler Buckingham is the president of Youth Intelligence, a market research firm specializing in the 7- to 35-year-old market.
Her company publishes the Cassandra Report, a comprehensive survey focused on identifying emerging trends among Generations X and Why?
&UR; ------------------------------------------------ &QC; &UR; EDITOR: Visit The New York Times Syndicate Web site at http://www.nytimes.com/syndicate for more information on the OPED package and other features.
&QL; &UR; NONSUBSCRIBERS: To publish a ``separate-buy'' feature article, it must be purchased.
Please contact one of these sales representatives: &LR; --.S.
and Canada: DEBRA WEYDERT in New Jersey at 1-732-390-4480; fax, 732-390-4697.
--urope and Asia: KARL HORWITZ in Paris at 47-42-17-11; fax, 47-42-80-44 or 47-42-18-81; telex, 282-942.
--atin America: ANA PENA in New York, 212-499-3333; fax, 212-499-3382. &QL;
FORT WORTH, Texas _ We can assume that the Rev.
Edgar Helms of Boston _ who, in 1910, founded what would become Goodwill Industries _ was not hip.
Neither was the good reverend, most likely, groovy.
He certainly didn't know that gray would become the new black.
Nonetheless, hip is how a new breed of Goodwill shoppers has come to consider the retail stores.
Due in part to Generation X's preternatural nostalgia for all things from the '70s (and '80s and even early '90s, it seems) and thanks to image-building efforts from the organization itself, Goodwill isn't just for people with ``special needs'' anymore.
``I was Goodwill before Goodwill was cool,'' says local twentysomething bohemian Bret McCabe.
``I've been going there for about a decade.
My shopping technique, wherever I've lived, is to find the poorest neighborhood and to go there.
You avoid places where hipsters go because they'll sift through everything and get the good stuff.
They won't go to the poor neighborhood''.
Like most Goodwillers, McCabe speaks lovingly of a favorite find.
``It was an early '70s-era purple, shiny three-piece suit, with, like, huge lapels.
It had a sheen to it,'' he says.
``I paid about $1.50 or $2.
But I gave it to a friend because it looked better on him.
He had an Afro''.
McCabe does admit to having ``special needs,'' but not the sort that Goodwill has strived to meet for almost a century.
The nonprofit organization uses revenues from its stores to fund community-based training and job-placement programs for people who otherwise might slip through the cracks.
Last year, Goodwill Industries served more than 200,000 people through training and job placement and sold nearly $690 million in donated goods.
Erin Quillian, the director of sales for Goodwill Industries of Fort Worth, says her organization got its groove back by focusing on retail display in the stores.
``I think a lot of it really has to do with changing our image and the way we present ourselves,'' she says.
``We're not what people typically think a thrift store is.
It's surprising to a lot of people, when they first come in, that we look just like any other store''.
Quillian says the national trend within Goodwill is to recruit store managers who have retail experience, people who ``really know how to set up a store and really create some excitement in it''.
Quillian herself worked at Ross Dress For Less and Dillard's before coming to Goodwill.
But perhaps the most surprising thing about Goodwill is not that bohemian hipsters snatch up the retro threads hanging on its well-displayed racks, but that the decidedly downscale shop founded by a Methodist minister is actually shaping the future of upscale fashion.
Doubters need look no further than the Dallas-based design firm William Reid.
William Reid's fall line graces such high-end shops as Stanley Korshak, Takashimaya and Saks Fifth Avenue.
Reid is so hip that sources say he knows what the new gray is _ or at least has a good idea.
And, as it turns out, he shops Goodwill for inspiration.
``It's almost like a fashion library,'' Reid says.
``I go in there just looking for things that are very unusual, whether it's details or fabrics or certain silhouettes that you can't explain to someone.
We find a lot of old ties, and we'll take a pattern of that tie and put it in the computer and play with it a little bit and make it into shirts and all sorts of things''.
In fact, Reid has found clothes at Goodwill whose sartorial splendor has stymied the finest craftsmen of Italy.
Only a few weeks ago, he bought a jacket for $15.
``It was a leather jacket that had this braiding stitched around the cuff,'' he remembers fondly.
``It was so unusual.
We immediately sent it over to our manufacturers and said, `How difficult is it to do this'?
They laughed and said they couldn't touch it.
The machinery to do some of those things just isn't around anymore''.
_ (Visit the Star-Telegram's online services on the World Wide Web: www.star-telegram.com)
(Undated) Here's a top 10 list of what drives workers crazy.
I picked it up at a seminar for human resource and diversity trainers.
Workers hate: 10.
Tiny raises.
9. Insincere thanks.
8. Being thrown into jobs without the necessary qualifications or training.
7. Disorganized, messy workplaces.
6. Bosses who share the stress of visits from their bosses.
5. ``Do it because I said so'' management.
4. Supervisors who overlook unacceptable behavior.
3. Management that ignores ideas from employees.
2. Failure to give consistent feedback or recognition when it's due.
1. Micromanagement.
Does that hit your button?
How old are you?
According to a training video, ``The X Factor: Managing and Motivating Generation X,'' that's the pet peeve list for Gen X, the work set younger than baby boomers.
Funny, I like that list.
And, judging from other nodding heads at the seminar, so did my fellow boomers.
The older-than-boomer bunch was bobbing in agreement, too.
It seems to me that meeting the needs of Gen X in the workplace is, or at least should be, the same as meeting the needs of everybody else.
The only difference is that Gen Xers have been brave enough to broadcast their demands.
Boomers and boomer-plus workers were too busy keeping their noses clean and being loyal to employers.
Oops. Too late.
Many found that the objects of their devotion didn't return, much less reward, that loyalty when it came time to make important decisions.
The Gen Xers, who grew up watching their parents regroup and rebuild their work lives, are left to insist, ``You need me.
You need my skills.
So here's what I want.
I want you to recognize me _ and pay me well _ for doing it''.
Claire Raines, a consultant who specializes in Gen X research and whose video we viewed, says workers in their 20s and early 30s are blunt about their wants.
They say: - Appreciate me and show it.
My regular paycheck is not enough.
- Give me flexible hours so I can accommodate my outside interests.
Work is not the only important thing in my life.
- Train me.
I need portable, marketable skills to take from job to job.
- Listen to me and involve me in planning and decision-making that affects me.
I will work better if I feel ``ownership''.
- Walk your talk.
I can spot phonies and despise them.
- Lighten up.
Work can be fun, even under pressure.
Once again: Does the list strike a chord?
How old are you?
Pinning labels on groups, be they segmented by age, race, gender or ethnicity, is a convenient but dangerous thing.
Beware of building monoliths.
It's not that easy.
But if Raines, or any other consultant, wants to share basic and sound workplace advice for any group, so be it.
And if the Gen Xers, who are said to be good at handling change, comfortable with technology, not intimidated by authority, and creative, can help create dynamic, rewarding workplaces for themselves, then maybe the rest of us can wade in their ripples.
SMYRNA, Tenn.
(AP) --Nissan launched its new Xterra sport utility vehicle Monday, but it didn't simply roll off an assembly line.
Covered in mud, a silver Xterra drove out of a smoking 20-foot backpack to the throbbing beat of loud music as hundreds of Smyrna plant workers wearing ``Xterra looks good dirty'' T-shirts cheered.
``That's how a real SUV should look,'' said Jerry Benefield, Nissan Motor Manufacturing Corp.
president and chief executive officer.
Company officials hope the Xterra (pronounced ehks-TEH'-ruh), Nissan's first totally new product since the Altima in 1992, will help the troubled carmaker boost sales by attracting active, young outdoor enthusiasts.
The name is intended to link images of Generation X and rugged terrain.
This SUV will not have leather seats, but there is an option for neoprene covers, which could be useful to surfers or scuba divers who climb in while wet.
The Xterra has room in the back for two mountain bikes to be placed in vertically, and mounts to hold them.
The optional roof rack can be fitted to hold snowboards, skis, canoes, kayaks and bikes.
And the Xterra has a ``backpack'' on its rear, accessible with the tailgate lifted, to hold a first-aid kit or other gear.
The Xterra goes on sale in early June, priced between $17,500-$25,000.
Most buyers are expected to take the two-wheel drive version with a V-6 engine, manual transmission and air --costing about $18,500, Nissan spokesman Jason Vines said.
Nissan plans to make at least 60,000 Xterras the first year, with top production capability at the plant of about 75,000.
In addition to the Xterra, Nissan is also counting on the redesigned Maxima and the Frontier Crew Cab truck to help turn the Japanese automaker around.
Last week, Nissan executives said they expected a $296.6 million loss for the fiscal year ended March 31.
The company, which recently entered a partnership with Renault SA of France in order to get a $5.4 billion cash infusion, plans to drop production and slash 5,000 jobs.
But Nissan North American president Minoru Nakamura said sales on this continent are expected to increase from around 630,000 Nissan and Infiniti vehicles to 700,000 for the 1999 fiscal year.
He said the Xterra should bring ``good showroom traffic'' that helps boost the sale of other Nissan vehicles, similar to what happened when Volkswagen began selling its new Beetle.
DETROIT (AP) --When G.
Richard Wagoner Jr.
assumes the job of CEO of General Motors Corp.
on June 1, he will be the youngest chief executive ever at GM, running the world's largest automaker at age 47.
But whether he can keep the company in good health will depend in part on improving GM's standing among consumers half his age.
With rivals hustling harder for younger buyers, Wagoner will have to show that GM can compete profitably for those consumers and keep bringing them back as they grow older.
"I think it's critical that we engage that group," Wagoner said Friday.
"History has shown that when you get a buyer into your family and treat them well, it's easier to keep them than to attract someone new.
"We've got to focus on products that meet their needs.
The challenge has been getting something that's eye catching...
at a price point that they want to pay".
The average American car buyer is in their early 50s, the time of life when many Americans are able to afford new vehicles more often.
While GM remains strong with older buyers, research from The Polk Co.
shows that the vehicle lines with the most pull with buyers under the age of 35 are imports --namely makes such as Isuzu, Honda and Volkswagen.
While Chevrolet, Pontiac and Saturn sell about one-fifth of their vehicles to customers under 35, the number drops precipitously for other GM vehicle lines, Polk found.
Karen Piurkowski, director of loyalty with Polk, said buyers in the age range from 23 to 35, commonly labeled Generation X, tend to consider foreign manufacturers more than their predecessors.
"GM has a big challenge ahead of them as people move up through these population segments," she said.
"It's not as natural for (Generation X members) to be as loyal to a domestic manufacturer, whereas the baby boomers were always a Ford family or a GM family".
Younger buyers have not always been a major concern of automakers, since they tend to choose cheaper, smaller vehicles that carry slim profits.
In recent years, GM has shifted its attention from small cars to trucks and sport utility vehicles.
The company has said it loses money on every Chevrolet Cavalier and Pontiac Sunfire it builds; those models will be 10 years old by the time GM brings out their replacements in 2004.
"Our research on younger buyers says they aren't necessarily interested in small cars," Wagoner said.
"I don't necessarily believe that traditional small cars with more progressive styling are what young buyers are after".
Other automakers have gone after younger buyers with more force.
Among the new vehicles targeted at the market are Chrysler's Neon and upcoming PT Cruiser, the Toyota Echo and Ford's Focus --all well-equipped models that carry far more options than cars of that size and price had before.
Ford said Friday that one fourth of all Focus buyers so far were under 25 years old --a higher share of younger buyers than any other vehicle sold in the United States.
To compete with those models, Wagoner said GM would use more expressive vehicles that are a step above the bottom of the market.
He points to the Pontiac Aztek, a new SUV coming out this year and the Pontiac Piranha, a concept car that will be shown for the first time at this week's Chicago Auto Show, as the types of vehicles that eventually will bring younger buyers back into the GM fold.
"Our view is that we're increasingly focused on the kind of things that will attract youthful (buyers) into the family," Wagoner said.
"That's why we're putting so much more emphasis on the Internet, because more people are using it and because of the kind of people that are using it as well".
Analyst Jim Hall with AutoPacific said the Aztek and an upcoming Saturn SUV had the potential to make GM a contender for those consumers.
"The fact that they're developing vehicles like that at all is amazing," Hall said.
"Their attitude for a long time was that they were going to be a fast second to market with a new product.
The irony is that being second to market is a losing proposition."
ATLANTA _ The first automobile to carry the year 2000 on its registration papers is likely to be the redesigned Dodge/Plymouth Neon.
Other manufacturers have announced 2000-model-year products, but with the first 2000 Neons being shipped to retailers this month, the DaimlerChrysler-built compact should go down in the record books as the first 2000 to take to the roads.
Conceived in '94 to target the Generation X market segment, Neon now claims to be ``grown up but not old''.
With a base price of $12,890, Neon boasts about its roominess, affordability, fun and refinement.
Neon has included as standard those options most frequently ordered in the past.
``D'' package buyers will get AM/FM/cassette with six speakers, four cup holders, a 60/40 fold-down split rear seat, intermittent wipers, rear defroster, visor vanity mirror, floor mats and a trunk light.
For an additional $1,760, ``G'' package purchasers get remote keyless entry, theft alarm, tilt steering, cruise control, power windows and door locks, and air conditioning.
Optional four-wheel anti-lock brakes, traction control and alloy wheels are also offered.
Cab-forward design Outside, Neon shares the cab-forward design pioneered by Chrysler.
A new rear-end and taillamp treatment along with more prominent wheel arches add to a more substantial appearance.
Finally, the Neon gets full-framed doors that increase body stiffness, improve window fit and reduce wind noise.
On the performance side, Neon has a 132-horsepower 2.0-liter engine.
A manual gearbox remains standard with an automatic optional.
Complementing the new ``refined'' exterior, taupe has been added as an interior color choice, but gone are the lizard greens, chrome yellows and periwinkle purple exterior colors of the original Neon.
Exterior colors include metallic silvers, garnet and jade.
Linda Sharp is a training consultant to auto manufacturers.
Her column is written exclusively for The Atlanta Journal-Constitution.
Write her in care of Wheels, The Atlanta Journal-Constitution, P.O.
Box 4689, Atlanta, GA 30302.
Or send comments online to sharpdriver(at)worldnet.att.net Story Filed By Cox Newspapers For Use By Clients of the New York Times News Service
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20003 Tel: 202-547-4512 Fax: 202-546-4194 COPYRIGHT 1998 BY WORLDSOURCES, INC.
, A JOINT VENTURE OF FDCH, INC.
AND WORLD TIMES, INC.
NO PORTION OF THE MATERIALS CONTAINED HEREIN MAY BE USED IN ANY MEDIA WITHOUT ATTRIBUTION TO WORLDSOURCES, INC.
Everyone seems to have his or her own idea about what ``Generation X'' means.
Is it: A) the name of the so-so punk band Billy Idol led over a decade and a half go?
B) the title of the 1991 ``groundbreaking'' novel by Douglas Coupland?
C) the title of the exploitative Marvel comic book series?
D) the buzzword of the decade (after ``information superhighway'') misused to describe anyone between 20 and 29 years old?
The answer is, of course, all of the above, but the definition we're most concerned with here is ``D''.
In the '90s, ``Generation X'' is a fashionable synonym for twentysomethings like ``baby boomers'' was for thirtysomethings in the '80s.
The problem is ``Gen X'' also comes with plenty of connotational baggage, giving rise to conflicting interpretations and semantic confusion.
Some have taken Generation X to mean the ``jilted generation'' (from the 1995 Prodigy album Music for the Jilted Generation) --``jilted'' in the economic sense.
If it were as simple as that, this article would end right here, right now --but it isn't and this article doesn't.
For a crash course on popular Gen X mythos, rent the Winona Ryder-Ethan Hawke flick Reality Bites and overdose on all the color-by-numbers Gen X cliches.
He's a slacker!
She's an aspiring filmmaker!
He's gay!
Their parents are divorced!
They're dancing to ``My Sharona''!
By the time of its release in 1994, the movie's stereotypical Gen X characters were just that --stereotypes.
According to Generation Ecch!, the definitive 1994 satirical tome on the Gen X phenom by Jason Cohen and Michael Krugman, it all started with a 1990 Time cover story that christened the post-boomer generation the ``twentysomething'' generation, an echo of thirtysomething, that dreary TV show about angst-ridden boomers who dressed incredibly well.
``Baby buster'' was the catchphrase for a while, as was ``13th generation,'' before stumbling out of vogue and allowing ``Generation X'' to seize the buzzword throne.
If ``Gen X'' is the king of buzzwords, then ``slacker'' is prince, bestowed staying power by Richard Linklater's 1991 cult hit film of that name.
To further complicate matters, according to 13th Gen: Abort, Retry, Ignore, Fail, the definitive 1993 non-satirical tome on the Gen X phenom by Neil Howe and Bill Strauss, Gen X is a mere subset of the ``13ers'', the authors' own coinage.
The number comes from Howe and Strauss' thesis that ``Counting back to the peers of Benjamin Franklin, this generation is the 13th to know the American nation, flag, and Constitution''.
If you're born between 1961 and 1981, you're a 13er, say the authors.
Note, however, that by their definition, 13ers --and by implication, Gen Xers -- are inherently American.
But thanks to the global hegemony of American media and popular culture, certain Gen X affectations engendered by America's particular socioscape have also taken root abroad, infecting the youths as distant and discrete as those in Singapore.
Some quirks travel better than others.
Sexual paranoia, political correctness, and the trauma of having to live with your parents even though you're over 18 remain exotic notions on our happy, shiny island republic.
Other American Gen X idiosyncrasies take on peculiar mutations.
For instance: In America, you're pessimistic about your financial future because you're stuck at a minimum-wage, dead-end job.
In Singapore, you're pessimistic about your financial future because you haven't made your first million by the time you're 25.
Life's a bitch.
The nexus that unites so-called Gen Xers around the world (apart from being born around the same time) is their common pop cultural experience.
A stoner in Austin, Texas, and a yuppie in Zouk, Singapore, may come from different political processes, different educational systems, different social frameworks, different ethnic upbringing, different economic class, different climate zones; yet put the two together and they'll probably bond over an intense discussion whether Madonna is a slut.
But don't let the label define the generation.
Let the generation define itself.
--Excerpted from Internet article by S.M.
Ong of Singapore
When he catalogs the ups and downs of going to work for Apple Computer at age 14, several elements are missing from Tom Williams' unflinching, self-critical rap: Finger-pointing.
Blame. Limp surrender to the Fates or impersonal forces beyond his control, be they The Man, The System or The Economy.
Instead, the former wunderkind exhibits a headlong acceptance of personal responsibility, a steadfast refusal to play the victim and a firm acknowledgment that his own decisions --good or bad -- have given him the life he leads.
``I can't stand people who play victim,'' said Williams, now 21 and living in Los Angeles where he screens technological projects for a venture capital firm.
``None of this was anybody's choice but mine.
No matter how impressionable or naive I have been, it has always been my decision''.
For Jacob Leverich, 18, a freshly minted high school graduate who holds down a sophisticated job at a high-end computer graphics company, pragmatic faith in self is a mantra.
``I can't allow someone to be responsible for my success; I can't allow someone to protect me from failure,'' said Leverich, who is headed to the University of Texas this fall.
``If I fail, it's my responsibility to get back up and back in the game''.
Riding the wave of technological innovation and economic expansion is a back-to-the-future ethic that emphasizes individual initiative and accountability, expressed with the hipness and attitude of youth.
In a land where Jerry Springer is a minor deity and the culture of complaint, alibi and blame is so strong that a conservative commentator once dubbed us a Nation of Victims, such unadulterated blasts of personal responsibility are bracingly refreshing.
``We're moving in the direction of putting a greater emphasis on personal responsibility rather than blaming fate or the social structure,'' said Ted Goertzel, a sociology professor at the Camden, N.J., campus of Rutgers University.
``There's been a shift in societal attitude away from blaming the system and looking for blame in the individual.
It's moving in a direction back toward a more positive view of what you can do rather than complaining about how the system is broke and what you can't do''.
The trend is particularly pronounced among the age groups represented by Leverich and Williams, experts say.
And this provides sharp generational contrast with the graying Baby Boomers just ahead of them on the march through life.
Self-reliance is the common thread between kids like Leverich, at the leading edge of what some sociologists call the Millennium Generation, and young adults like Williams, who is at the tail end of Generation X.
Experts note that Xers manifest this cross-generational trait with a decided cynicism and sense of isolation, while Millennials are more optimistic and more likely to band together.
Remember, though, that this is vague and mushy sociological stuff, lacking the absolutes of atomic physics.
Generation X is an exceedingly broad monicker for anyone born after the Baby Boom and before the Class of 2000 just now leaving high school.
But polls back the notion of generational differences in outlook about responsibility, self-reliance and the power of individual effort.
A July 1999 Pew Research Center survey shows that a significantly higher share of those between ages 18 and 29 --almost 79 percent -- believe individual effort is the key to success.
In contrast, only 71 percent of those between 30 and 49 believe this.
The same survey shows the younger age group also has the strongest belief in the power of the individual: 84 percent of those 18 to 29 think everyone has the inner strength to succeed in life; only 77 percent of those between the ages of 50 and 64 and 70 percent of those age 65 and older believe this.
Xers and Millennials are also linked by matter-of-fact low expectations about politics, government, corporations and other traditional social institutions, the pros say.
To the degree that they look to others for support or commitment, it's to a loose collective of friends, family or like-minded peers, or non-traditional organizations like non-profits.
They believe in action over words, movement toward a goal rather than discussion of an idea.
``Look at it this way --if the motto of Generation X is `Just Do It,' then the motto of the Millennials is `Let's Do It,' while the motto of the Baby Boomers is `Let's Meditate About It,''' said Neil Howe, co-author of ``Generations: The History of America's Future''.
In a series of books with co-author William Strauss, Howe argues that American history has been strongly influenced by a cycle of generational traits ranging from idealism to alienation.
Boomers were idealistic until Vietnam, Nixon, the assassinations of the Kennedy brothers and Martin Luther King Jr.
and the economic upheaval of the '70s and '80s made them disillusioned and inward-looking, Howe said.
Xers are alienated and isolated, taking as a given the empty promise of traditional societal institutions like family and government, arming themselves with the cynical belief that they're on their own.
Howe said the most motivated of this generation turn lone-wolf cynicism into individual action that has positioned them to take advantage of the current economic expansion; those who don't are slackers, missing out on the boom's big ride.
``This is a very libertarian generation,'' Howe said of the Xers.
``They believe you take care of yourself, that you rely on yourself and your platoon, your surrogate family.
... The take was: Life can be cruel, you have to deal with it on your own''.
Still a work in progress, the Millennials are just emerging from high school.
They exhibit the most optimism about the future, a by-product of growing up in nothing-but-good economic times, in an era of renewed emphasis on protecting kids from the ravages of broken homes and other societal forces.
Howe said Millenials are just as cynical about traditional institutions and can be just as alienated as Xers, but he also notes a mighty cross-current --willingness to join cooperative efforts that aren't self-centered, and belief that they can rise above the challenges of the future.
If that combination persists, it's Howe's belief that the Millenials will take on the mantle of the World War II generation and their unstinting belief in duty, honor and country.
Much of this rings true to Jackson Pace.
The teacher and technology coordinator at Lyndon Baines Johnson High School in Austin, Texas, works closely with the teen computer wizards in the school's special science and technology program, including Jacob Leverich.
The Millennials in his program are technologically savvy, confident that their computer skills are a bankable backstop for the future.
They're unburdened by the baggage carried by boomers --such as the need to be in touch with every emotion, or the financial worries ingrained by the economies of the '70s and '80s and the Great Depression stories passed down by parents and grandparents.
``There's no overriding fear that they can't whip it, they can't overcome it,'' Pace, 43, said of his students.
``These kids have a full toolbelt of skills.
They analyze quicker, they assess need quicker, they pull the tool, get it done and move on''.
Pace, a Baby Boomer, contrasts this with his own approach to issues: ``I have to know that it's OK, know that you think it's OK, and I want to talk to you about it being OK.
We'll justify our point and then do it.
``These kids process it and get it done with no talk''.
(FIRST OPTIONAL TRIM BEGINS) Pace thinks the Millennials have a decided advantage over Xers --a willingness to cooperate with each other, a sense of something larger than themselves and a fearlessness born from prosperity and comfort with technology.
``The Xers knew the only reason they were in this world was because that yuppie parent had money and they were another possession,'' said Pace.
``And that created a real cynical kid.
... ``Today's kids really are bubbling up in the last quarter-century as renaissance kids.
They're not money grubbers.
They know they can get the money.
And I'm not sure they're basing their human happiness on cash''.
Leverich echoes this last point: ``What will make me happy is not necessarily making more money.
What will make me happy is to set myself apart and not just be another person off the assembly line''.
(FIRST OPTIONAL TRIM ENDS) Technology is the key to this confident self-reliance, said Mary Ann Rafoth, professor of educational psychology at Indiana University of Pennsylvania.
Computer competence gives adolescents and young adults a taste of success at a crucial stage of life, a boost they are likely to ride into middle age.
``They see technology as a big part of the future and they're comfortable with it,'' Rafoth said.
``They tend to be individualistic and see themselves in control and not the pawns of giant, impersonal forces.
That's because they haven't lived through a Vietnam or World War II.
They see it as getting what they want out of life and nothing stopping them and technology enabling to do that''.
The flip side of this confidence is an uninformed arrogance, an unwillingness to acknowlege the value of life experiences outside the narrow band of technological competence.
It is the thing that drives boomers to crazed distraction when they confront Xers and Millennials.
``They may be more sophisticated and more knowlegeable about one thing --technology -- and because of that they won't give you credit for the things you've lived through,'' Rafoth said.
(SECOND OPTIONAL TRIM FOLLOWS) Howe, who runs management seminars, says fixation on technology exacerbates the biggest cultural clash in the modern workplace --the conflict between boomer-era managers and Xers who discount what their elders have lived through.
``Boomers are into mission statements and corporate culture and creating a sense of community and team play,'' said Howe.
``Xers are much more contractual about work.
`If it's 5 o'clock, I'm outta here'.
They say they bring to the job all they need to bring.
They don't bring all the baggage and expectations that boomers bring''.
Millennials share this transactional attitude about work, but sport it with less of a nasty edge.
``Instead of being the enemy of these corporations, it's just where we go to work,'' said Leverich.
``I don't see them as my enemy, but I don't see them as my savior, either''.
Williams, who sometimes sounds like a world-weary boomer instead of the tail-end Xer he is, buys the notion that his generation believes in self- determination.
But he doesn't see this as something noble.
Deserted by divorcing parents and discredited social institutions, Xers had no choice but to rely on their own devices, he says.
And he doesn't see his generation or the Millennials as any less self- absorbed than the boomers.
As proof he cites the resiliance of conspicuous consumption, wide reliance on the anti-depressant Prozac and the popularity of the public self-confessional.
Still, he wryly notes the grit and high-tech gumption of his peers and the next generation down.
``Maybe it was Steven Spielberg,'' he jokes.
``All of his movies, which we all grew up on, feature kids overcoming problems and saving the adults.
We've grown up with this very surreptitious, but very strong can-do attitude.
``The limitation of my father's generation and his father's generation was to never dare something beyond your station in life.
Today, those self-imposed mental barriers are no longer there.
You can do almost anything and accomplish almost anything you set out to accomplish.''
&UR; &LR; Tom Beaudoin is not your typical theologian engaged in esoteric explications of ancient religious texts.
Instead, he uses MTV as a research lab.
He studies tattoos and body piercing as expressions of spirituality.
And he's also in a rock band made up of other theologians.
Beaudoin, 29, is a self-described Generation Xer, that amorphous population cohort born in the mid-1960s to the late 1970s.
Beaudoin wants to be their theologian.
He believes that Generation X _ contrary to popular perception _ is deeply spiritual, if not necessarily devout.
You just need to look at their taste in music, movies, and dress, says Beaudoin, a PhD candidate at Boston College.
He makes his case in a new book, ``Virtual Faith: The Irreverent Spiritual Quest of Generation X''.
It isn't that Generation X isn't interested in religion, Beaudoin argues.
It's simply that its members are looking for a religion they can believe in.
And what GenXers are after can't easily be found within the four walls and under the steeple of the local church.
To understand the spirituality of Generation X you have to look at popular culture, particularly media culture.
There has never been another generation, Beaudoin says, so intimately linked to media culture _ the Internet, television, film, and music.
``Pop culture is our amniotic fluid; it's where we find meaning in our life,'' says Beaudoin, a Roman Catholic who strayed from the faith for a few years before becoming convinced that the church's tradition and teachings can appeal to people in his generation.
Sitting in his Somerville apartment, overflowing with books and CDs, he ticks off examples of spiritual or religious themes he sees in contemporary youth culture.
There are strong religious or spiritual undercurrents in recent albums by artists ranging from U2 to Sarah McLachlan to Puff Daddy.
Religious messages are also sprinkled more frequently in movies, for example, in ``Contact,'' ``Chasing Amy,'' and even ``Titanic''.
The Dalai Lama has become hugely popular among young people, not just because he is a stirring champion of human rights, but because people are drawn to his Tibetan Buddhist teachings as a way of coping with life's stresses.
Harvey Cox, a renowned professor at Harvard Divinity School where Beaudoin received a master's degree, said at first blush it might seem foolish to suggest that Generation X is interested in spiritual meaning.
But, in a forward to Beaudoin's book, Cox says his former student might be on to something.
``Here is a generation that stays away from most churches in droves but loves songs about God and Jesus, a generation that would score very low on any standard piety scale but at times seems almost obsessed with saints, visions, and icons in all shapes and sizes,'' Cox writes.
``These are the young people who, styrofoam cups of cappuccino in hand, crowd around the shelves of New Age spirituality titles in the local book market and post thousands of religious and quasi-religion notes on the bulletin boards in cyberspace''.
And, Beaudoin and Cox both note that Pope John Paul II enjoys a strong following among people in the Generation X population.
Last summer, even the Vatican was stunned when more than a million young people turned out to help John Paul celebrate World Youth Day in Paris.
Beaudoin, in his book, identifies several themes that underpin the ``theology'' of Generation X.
First is a deep suspicion of institutions, including organized religion.
Second is the importance of having a personal spiritual experience.
Beaudoin says the Catholic Church, in its liturgy, must do a better job of ``giving people a powerful experience of the Holy Spirit, which is the only way people will realize there is something at stake to being Catholic''.
A third theme among Generation Xers is a belief that suffering can be a redemptive, spiritual experience.
Finally, Generation Xers believe ambiguity is a central part of faith.
Rather than fearing uncertainty, Beaudoin says, Generation Xers embrace it.
Beaudoin has started a Catholic ministry aimed at people in Generation X at the Paulist Center in downtown Boston.
``GenXers are hungry for spirituality and the challenge is to find the most effective means of satisfying that hunger,'' he said.
&QL; &QL; Religion Notes &QL; &QL; A Vatican envoy has recently visited Iraq, reportedly to discuss the possibility of adding that nation to a possible millennium tour of the Holy Land by Pope John Paul II.
The Iraqi town of Ur is the traditional home of the prophet Abraham before he set out with his family for the biblical land of Canaan.
Abraham is revered by Christians, Jews, and Muslims.
The tour would include stops in Israel, Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon, Syria, and Palestinian self-rule territories.
&QL; (Comments may be sent to The Spiritual Life, c/o Diego Ribadeneira, Box 2378, Boston, MA 02107-2378; or via e-mail to religion(at)globe.com.
AGOURA HILLS, Calif.
_ Generation X consumers prefer compact and premium midsize vehicles, with their No.
1 choice being the Honda Civic, according to a report released Tuesday by Agoura Hills-based J.D.
Power and Associates.
But that 20- to 34-year-old group is a highly fragmented lot and, thus, a tough bunch to market to _ which is something carmakers are going to have to learn to do, as this group is expected to constitute one-quarter to one-third of the car-buying public by 2005, the study said.
Also, the study found that older Gen-Xers rely on the Internet to obtain information before buying a car much more frequently than do 20- to 24-year-olds, who have less access to the Internet, are first-time buyers and tend to turn to family and friends for input.
``One other interesting finding is that Generation X is more willing to stretch its income to buy a vehicle,'' said Sara Wong Hilton, manager of market analysis at Power's Detroit office, who led the study.
Gen-Xers will pay about 46 percent of their annual household income on a new vehicle, vs.
35 percent for baby boomers.
Lynda Sakamaki-Smith, spokeswoman for American Honda Motor Co.
Inc., said she wasn't surprised to hear that Honda models are among Gen-Xers' favorites.
The company has sold 129,531 1999 Civics through May, and the median age is 28 for the sportier coupe model.
About half the Civic buyers are single; 46.5 percent are male, 53.5 percent are female; and 55 percent are college graduates or higher, spokeswoman Sakamaki-Smith said.
``This Generation X group sees (the Civic's) potential for fun, but it's reliable at the same time,'' she said.
The fairly widespread notion that America's young adults at century's end are navel-gazing, latte-scarfing me-firsters is bogus, says Mark Gearan.
He should know.
As director of the Peace Corps for 3 1/2 years, he's shoveled thousands of Peace Corps volunteers off to the backwaters of the planet.
These are not plush Club Med vacations, but two-year commitments, often in the Back of Beyond, to work with folks at ground level who usually have little in the way of tools but their hands.
``This fall we'll have 7,400 volunteers abroad _ that's the highest number in 25 years.
Right now we have 6,700 in 80 different countries.
We're making a big push to get up to 10,000 volunteers.
So for those who paint the young people of `Gen X' or `Gen Y' as slackers, we don't see that''.
Nor, apparently, does the Congress, which two weeks ago approved money to expand the Peace Corps, a rare show of bipartisan support for a Clinton initiative.
Flying to Boston first thing on the morning after the White House St.
Patrick's Day bash, Gearan, the Gardner native who was deputy chief of staff and White House communications director in Clinton's first term, clicked off his agency's growth rings: ``Four years ago we had 100,000 inquiries a year.
Last year we had 150,000.
Friday night in Symphony Hall, the Handel &AMP; Haydn Society of Boston and New Heritage Music Foundation will present ``Celebrating the Voice of Peace,'' to commemorate the Peace Corps's founding 38 years ago by President Kennedy.
David McCullough, the author and PBS broadcaster, will narrate from writings of JFK and his favorite poets.
``I'm praying the pianist gets sick,'' cracked Gearan, a saloon piano player of some note.
The Handel &AMP; Haydn Society approached him two years ago about celebrating Kennedy's Peace Corps scheme, he said.
The oratorio composed by Dan Welcher is the first work commissioned by the Society in 20 years.
There will be a 3 p.m.
Symphony Hall matinee performance Sunday.
From its creation in 1961, the first year of JFK's 1,000-day presidency, the Peace Corps was a beacon of optimism and neighborliness that has served the country well.
So far 152,000 Americans volunteered for short money and long hours in remote spots which needed a school, a well, a Ground Zero health program.
There are 38 American volunteers who'll rendevous in Symphony Hall and fly out Saturday to Senegal in West Africa.
``There is certainly the same sense of travel and adventure in today's volunteers that we've had since '61,'' said Gearan, ``but now they're getting their experience in the global economy''.
Health and Human Services Secretary Donna Shalala is a Peace Corps alum, as are Senator Chris Dodd and five congressmen, three of them Republicans.
Unlike the $30,000 to $50,000 college bonuses the military uses to lure high school-graduating recruits in this almost-full-employment age, the Peace Corps's applicant pool is average age 28, almost all of them recent college graduates.
Once selected, they get a get a modest monthly stipend to live on, plus full health insurance, and deferments on college loans, if any.
On completing their two-year stint, they get a readjustment allowance of $6,000.
Gearan in the past month was in Africa and Latin America with Clinton.
``In Tanzania I sat with Charlie Stith (the Boston minister who is US ambassador there) and the Tanzanian prime minister, who said the first American he ever met was his Peace Corps teacher.
You hear that all over Africa and the Third World''.
But not all idealists are young people.
One volunteer out of 12 is over age 50.
Massachusetts furnishes more volunteers than all but four other states, said Gearan.
Among the top 25 colleges feeding the Peace Corps are UMass, Tufts, Smith, Williams, BU, and Gearan's alma mater, Harvard (he is class of '78).
Gearan started a new Crisis Corps, to recruit former volunteers to go back for short stays to countries hit by natural disaster or humanitarian crises.
``In Honduras on the last trip, we have one guy who's an engineer on the Central Artery project here.
He's taking two months to go back to Honduras to help out after Hurricane Mitch.
He's a perfect example of a guy who's been there; he can go in and literally on Day One be ready to make a difference''.
Elaborate efforts are made to furnish volunteers with training, language skills, and medical precautions.
Not one volunteer has been kidnapped, and ``safety and security are our No.
1 priority''.
In-house surveys show a high level of volunteer satisfaction, Gearan said.
``Nine out of ten would volunteer again, and the same proportion would recommend it to others''.
The Peace Corps remains Kennedy's enduring governmental monument.
It made JFK into a worldwide figure of inspiration, the most popular American abroad before Muhammed Ali, the all-time popularity champ.
``We are in countries today which did not exist when the Peace Corps started,'' said Gearan, ``And we're in countries today where you couldn't get a visa as an American''.
&QL; (David Nyhan is a Globe columnist.)
Was TJ Maxx trying to promote a more youthful corporate culture when a young manager at a New Jersey store fired several employees over 40?
Talk to Sherry Lang, spokeswoman for TJX Cos.
in Framingham, Mass.
, and her response is an emphatic ``No''.
``By policy, this company does not discriminate against anyone for any reason,'' says Lang.
``We believe their claims have no merit, none at all''.
A class-action lawsuit filed by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission last fall alleges TJX Cos.
, parent of the retail chain, had exposed older employees to unfair discipline since August 1995.
Much of the case centers around 59-year-old Betty Heyner, a former sales clerk who claims she was railroaded out of her job back in 1995 because of her age.
Heyner is alleging that many of the problems she experienced while running the jewelry counter at a suburban New Jersey store stemmed from a young supervisor's brash managerial style and unorthodox work habits.
Heyner's former manager could not be reached by telephone to comment.
But if allegations in the case illustrate anything at all, it is that tensions between Generation Xers and senior employees are not uncommon, and when younger managers are in charge of older workers emotions are apt to heighten.
There are now 45 million Generation Xers, born between 1965 and 1977.
Self-starters who would rather be in the driver's seat than wait their turn, many twentysomethings are now moving into coveted managerial positions, jobs baby boomers waited years to get.
``Generation Xers are really the forerunners of a new career paradigm, and they think of themselves as free agents,'' says Bruce Tulgan, founder of Rainmaker Thinking, a New Haven consulting firm that helps companies better understand this generation.
``They move into positions of power quickly because they don't do things the old way, and many are really trying to be the kind of manager they wanted to have''.
What kind of manager is that?
Managers who sidestep rules that get in the way.
Managers who aren't afraid to take chances.
Not surprising, baby boomer employees often describe these new managers as brash, audacious, arrogant, and, yes, a bit threatening.
``Older workers often feel that companies are looking for younger people, that they can bring in people who are younger on a temporary basis and not pay benefits,'' says psychologist Bruce Cedar, a workplace consultant at CMG Associates in Newton.
``The older worker feels more vulnerable.
When you get younger mangers in, oftentimes I've heard it said that older employees feel even more threatened,'' notes Cedar.
``They feel younger people are simply looking for ways to get rid of older, more expensive workers.
This is coming from what individuals feel, and is certainly not based on any company policy''.
The workplace of the 1990s might seem threatening, even volatile, to baby boomers.
Generation Xers, by contrast, have experienced little else but change, and they thrive on it.
``Generation Xers disdain authority for the sake of authority,'' says Tulgan, author of ``Managing Generation X'' (1995 Merritt Publishing, $19.95).
``So, most of the young people who are moving into positions of power tend to soft pedal their authority because of perceived hostility''.
And that can cause problems in the workplace.
``Sometimes they soft pedal their authority so much that when things go wrong, they go ballistic,'' notes Tulgan ``And there may be awkwardness with authority, which can be manifested by inappropriate behavior''.
Heyner claims her 21-year-old manager had temper tantrums and blew up at her without cause.
``One day I saw her blow up, right at the store,'' says Heyner.
``I was stunned.
She started throwing papers around and yelling.
She didn't like the way (the jewelry) was being displayed.
The whole thing was shocking''.
Experts stress most Generation X managers take their responsibilities seriously.
But they don't want to be held back by policies such as seniority.
``There is a myth out there that these young people, as managers, are slackers,'' said Tulgan.
``That's not true.
These are people who have come of age during the most profound changes in our economy since the Industrial Revolution.
For boomers, downsizing and reorganizing and re-engineering may seem totally revolutionary and frightening.
But to Generation Xers, that's just the way things are.
They grew up with it, and they are taking advantage of the changes and transformations''.
Still, experts say, companies would do well to offer these young managers what they crave most: training, plenty of feedback, clear goals, and monthly rewards for job performance.
&QL; (Diane E.
Lewis is a Boston Globe staff member.
She can be reached at The Boston Globe, Boston, MA 02107, or by e-mail at work(at)globe.com)
NEW YORK (AP) --It was the first day of school for Macy's new assistant buyers.
The twentysomething recruits had barely signed in when one bustled up to training chief Bernadette Commisa, asking: ``How am I doing''?
``That took me back!
We had only just come in and taken attendance,'' Commisa recalls.
``They see the world a little differently than we did''.
Bold, savvy, confident and often demanding, the 45 million youngsters dubbed Generation X are hard to miss in today's workplace, and the staider side of Corporate America is only just learning --sometimes with eyebrows raised -- to cope with them.
Companies from Macy's to Deloitte Consulting are revamping their training and recruiting programs, educating managers and streamlining communications to better understand and utilize this sometimes maligned generation.
``All we were exposed to was the (images of the) earring in the nose, snowboards and baggy clothing,'' says Deborah Gatti, senior training specialist for Mervyn's department stores.
``We've had to train our culture about the great things about these folks, and their shortcomings, and how we can support them''.
Sandra Bench, a 24-year-old Mervyn's manager in Okemos, Mich.
, is well aware of her generation's mixed reputation.
``To me, Generation X defines an age group; to others, it defines a work ethic and many other things as well,'' she says.
But wait.
Good young workers have always questioned authority, asked lots of questions and rattled their elders' nerves.
Is today's youth so different?
It seems so.
Just as baby boomers were shaped by Watergate and the Vietnam War, the generation that ranges from their 20s up to mid-30s has been influenced by this era of technology, television, daycare, divorce and downsizing.
As a result of growing up in a fast-paced world, these young adults are said to be even more skeptical and impatient with the status quo than previous generations.
Often reared as latchkey children, they're fiercely independent, yet needy --working well alone but requiring liberal doses of feedback.
Disgusted by their parents' workaholism, they defend their right to a full life outside of work.
``The GenX age group does come to the workplace with different expectations and experiences,'' says Don Blanton, human resources director at Sandia National Laboratories, a Lockheed Martin subsidiary that has revised key management training programs in the last year to include lessons on what makes Generation X tick.
Just take a look at the many companies this generation has started, in Silicon Valley and elsewhere.
Their offices are freewheeling, egalitarian, fast-paced, surf's-up kind of places, where play is taken as seriously as work.
It's no wonder that many conservative companies, run by aging baby boomers, have begun trying to adapt to this younger crowd.
And adapt they must.
A big reason that companies are bothering to bend to the new generation is they are literally ``hot stuff''.
They get three, four or five offers in this tight job market, and many are confident to the point of arrogance.
Further, they move on quickly.
Americans hold an average of nearly nine different jobs by their 30s, according to the Labor Department.
Today's grads are bold enough to ask a prospective employer uncomfortable questions such as, ```If I don't like what my boss says, can I go to the next level'''? says Debbie Herd, manager of college relations for J.C.
Penney. ``With the strong economy...
they can ask those questions that can push a company close to the edge of not liking them,'' says Herd, adding that young candidates have been so tough that J.C.
Penney tossed its ``fluff'' brochures and now gives out hard-core information, even details on salaries, at job fairs and first meetings.
Generation Xers also are making splashes in the workplace.
Macy's East, a division of Federated Department Stores, had to change its training of managers and of new recruits to keep up.
Buyers had problems keeping the new generation of executives ``motivated, stimulated, challenged and growing in their new careers,'' recalls Lawrence Naishtut, until recently vice president of merchant development and recruitment.
About 18 months ago, Macy's began sending top managers to a class on supervising employees that included lessons on Generation X.
``Some of the older management needed to recognize that life has changed,'' said Naishtut.
``Who cares whether (GenXers) are good or bad?
The bottom line is that they are the future''.
At the same time, Macy's began training assistant buyers on what they could expect at work, since paying dues isn't considered a GenX strong suit.
``They're wondering why they're not at the Giorgio Armani show the minute they get placed,'' says Commisa, the merchant training director.
Deloitte Consulting, whose average worker is 35-years-old, responded to GenX demands for feedback by adding to its evaluation process a primer on how to succeed at the company, says human resources managing director Karen Morrell.
GenXers crave such roadmaps in order to manage in a world where workers get downsized regardless of seniority and skills quickly grow obsolete, says Bruce Tulgan, a Generation X consultant.
To satisfy their strong needs for independence and recognition, they also like to feel they're in the driver's seat.
That's why Mervyn's revamped its recruit training from an ad hoc effort largely based on shadowing managers to a more formal program that includes self-paced written studies and active training.
``They've got the remote control,'' says Gatti.
``It's up to them to get through the program''.
Russ Hamilton, a 23-year-old Mervyn's manager in San Jose, Calif.
, thoroughly approves.
``For me, to read about and then actually do it makes me more comfortable with it,'' he says.
``It allows me to feel confident in that task or job''.
His generation is also comfortable drawing the line at too much work.
They are driving companies to allow employees to make use of work-life programs that were little promoted or honestly supported.
They clearly reject the baby boomers' workaholic ethic.
Karen Morrell recalls one Deloitte consultant who, after two years with the company, asked for a year's paid sabbatical.
He didn't get it, but she says she has to admire the Generation X boldness.
``If they want something, they ask for it, ...
(and) it's good business sense to listen,'' she says.
``Their sense of balance and perspective and self-motivation is very good for our business.''
We Americans love our traditions: baseball, the Fourth of July, hot dogs, apple pie, jeans and voting.
Well, we're not exactly in love with voting, or maybe we are and that's why we ignore it.
Voting continues to be a right that only Americans older than 35 show interest in, and somehow members of that group, now parents and grandparents, aren't passing on the practice to their youth.
Americans who are ages 18 to 35, Generation X, who were once thought of as the slacker generation, indeed slack at one duty _ voting.
No longer a glut of sniveling teens, Gen Xers are graduating with degrees, getting hitched, buying homes, setting up 401(k) plans and investing in the latest Internet company, which they are probably running.
However, even with all that adult responsibility, you can bet that more Xers across the nation stood in lines to see ``The Blair Witch Project'' than those who stood in lines to vote in the September elections.Is it apathy?
``Politicians rant and rave about change, but when they get elected, nothing happens,'' said Michael Growe, 32.
A medical technician at a Scottsdale, Ariz.
, clinic, Growe did not vote in September.
He feels the winds of political change are interest groups' hot air.
``With all the lobbyists pushing their views, a single vote won't count,'' Growe said.
However, he forgets the adage that Heather Locklear made famous in her Faberge Organic Shampoo ad: ``You tell your friends and they'll tell their friends and their friends will tell their friends,'' so on and so forth.
One vote produces many.
Locally, since 1994, all voter turnout in the county's bi-yearly elections has languished below 20 precent, according to the Elections Department.
And Generation X is the most lackluster group in terms of voting.
Nationally, the trend is also daunting.
According to the Census Bureau, in 1996 only 39 percent of people ages 18 to 34 cast ballots for a presidential candidate.
That compares with 60 percent of baby boomers, people ages 35 to 64.
Generation X's professors warn that issues demanding their attention exist now.
They point out that the political system is a back-scratching affair between voters and candidates.
Apathy is a detriment.
``Until younger folks get involved, no attention will get paid to issues that hurt them,'' said Kenneth Goldstein, a political-science professor at Arizona State University.
X-ers need to march up the steps of their capitols and down the D.C.
Beltway, trumpeting issues such as Social Security and Medicare reform, public versus private education, and environmental issues, Goldstein said.
Boomers are spanking X-ers at the polls in regards to those issues being addressed for the future of the younger generation.
So, is the Gen-X cohort too self-involved to care?
Studies indicate that members of Gen-X are more likely to volunteer than to vote.
According to the 1997 Survey of Public Participation in the Arts, among people polled about their volunteer efforts in 1996, 35 percent of Americans ages 18 to 24 participated in ``charity work,'' and 41 percent of those ages 25 to 34 did.
Only 39 percent of people ages 18 to 34 voted that same year, a presidential election year.
Fred Solop, a professor at Northern Arizona University in Flagstaff who teaches a course in political participation, said his students are aware of issues, but they feel the odds of achieving anything are insurmountable.
``They are concerned with whether they (people 18 to 34 years old) will have access to training and education programs, insurance, adequate health care, environmental issues,'' Solop said.
``(But) there is a sense of despair, that they can't be effective''.
Bill Klain, a Scottsdale, Ariz.
, attorney, feels that despair.
He is registered to vote but hasn't cast a ballot since the 1996 presidential election.
Klain, 30, still considers himself to be concerned, civically involved.
He pays close attention to a range of issues from education to Supreme Court vacancies to tax and Social Security reform.
However, ``I'm not real big on voting,'' Klain, said.
``I've become disillusioned with the two-party system, and I get a feeling of futility''.
To understand the system and the issues, one must be attentive to it.
Inattentiveness is a sign of a generation reared on entertainment, said Tom &UR; Keating, a political-science professor at ASU.
From television to books, everything is flashy, shocking, bright and exciting.
Keating, a boomer in his 50s, noted the stark difference between the text-only books he read as an undergrad and the books he teaches from.
``Now (books come with) four or five colors, cartoons and all kinds of much more flashy stuff,'' Keating said.
He concedes that some students are cognizant of the issues, but that many lack the attention span to follow them.
``Unless you grab their interest in a class discussion early, they're gone,'' he said.
Keating also attributes the lack of interest to the media's portrayal of election campaigns.
People such as Growe and Klain believe candidates fudge on campaign promises because TV and print reporters focus their coverage on interpreting what the candidates mean, rather than on the simple facts of what the candidates say.
``It's like the new biography of Reagan, where the author injects himself,'' Keating said.
``The reporter judges the validity of the candidate when there is no evidence that the reporter has the authority to do so.
Actually, candidates try to fulfill their campaign promises at a high rate''.
One political campaign that recently grabbed the attention of Gen-X-ers was Jesse Ventura's run for governor of Minnesota.
Ventura, a former World Wrestling Federation character, was ushered into Minnesota's governorship on the backs of ballots cast by young people.
Among the youngest voters casting ballots _ those younger than age 30 _ Ventura got nearly half of those votes, according to an exit poll conducted for the ``Minneapolis'' ``Star Tribune'' by Voter News Service among 1,449 voters statewide.
The point was made: When moved to vote, Gen-X is a force worth reckoning with, but what is daunting is that it takes a former TV personality to arouse them.
The generation's boredom with politics is evident in college political-science classes across the nation.
Freshmen interest in keeping up to date with politics is now less than half of what it was in 1966, then 58 percent, according to the American Political Science Association.
Granted, President Kennedy had been assassinated, the civil-rights movement was burning throughout America, and the country's involvement in Vietnam was escalating.
Still, somehow that politically involved 58 percent has not been able to inspire its offspring into political action.
In the 1990s, freshmen interest in keeping up with political affairs has dropped from 42 percent in 1990 to its present record low of 26 percent, AMPSA statistics indicate.
Ann Kissell, 22, summed up Generation X's disillusionment by saying, ``I don't have a lot of faith in political campaigns, and you don't vote for the lesser of two evils''.
In response to the void of indifference, the National Council of State Legislators has passed a resolution calling for education on representative democracy, and the National Association of Secretaries of State devoted its 1999 meeting to considering ways to encourage young Americans to pay attention to politics and to become voters.
The Arizona Secretary of State Office mails a greeting card to teens on their 18th birthdays, reminding them to register.
The office also provides voter registration over the Internet.
``Young people are used to using the Internet, and they can register through the Internet,'' said Jessica Funkhouser, elections director for the Secretary of State Office.
``We're trying to connote turning 18 with being able to vote''.
Although the Secretary of State's elections department reports that Internet registration is catching on, it hasn't translated into a greater number of voters, especially among the young.
Then again, maybe the Internet informed are too young yet to vote and are fixed in a political eddy waiting for their wind of change at 18.
Zaira Balmaceda, 16, a Phoenix-area high school student, provides a positive outlook for Generation Y, or the millennials, Generation X's younger counterpart.
Balmaceda, who said that politics is not a regular subject in her house, still relishes a desire to back issues and choose a candidate sans singlets.
She also, believe it or not, reads the newspaper to keep up on the issues.
``I'm always reading the newspaper to see what's going on and listening to the news,'' Balmaceda said.
``These (politicians) are the people who are going to be deciding the future in our community''. &QL;
TRENTON, Ohio _ In a time when the nation's public schools are devoid of organized prayer, millions of students, teachers and parents bowed their heads Wednesday morning commemorating the annual ``See You at the Pole''.
In Trenton, more than 30 students, teachers and parents gathered at a flagpole outside of Edgewood High School to pray for spiritual guidance.
Generation X-ers put aside their backpacks and joined hands with their parents and teachers to make a ``visible (religious) stand'' just before the start of the school day.
The group prayed for classmates, faculty and teachers as well as for the well-being of the nation and a ``safe school year''.
Freshman Billy McClure said he attended the event ``to help everybody be a witness for God.`` ``Without prayer you don't get anywhere.
You got to pray everyday to keep you strong,'' McClure said.
Senior Janet Tannreuther said she attended in protest of new legislation that bans open religious expression during extracurricular activities including sporting events.
``(I came) to pray with my fellow students because they took away our right to pray at the football games,'' Tannreuther said.
``I thought that was wrong''.
``This event allows us to keep (children) focused upon God,'' said her brother Chris Tannreuther, standing a few feet away.
``He is the answer to all of our problems''.
Government teacher and parent Mike Mignery said the event allowed him to reflect upon legislative laws and freedom of expression.
``You have the right to freely practice your faith.
That is the foremost amendment in the Bill of Rights.
I think it's important for us to do that here at school.
This is lawful.
This is what the courts say we are allowed to do,'' Mignery said.
``I think the reason we are losing many of our rights is because may of us aren't exercising our rights today''.
According to the ``See You at the Pole'' Website, the event draws more than 3 million participants each year.
The site said the event is student initiated and came out of the desire of `` a small group of teen-agers'' from Burleson, Texas, in 1990.
Story Filed By Cox Newspapers For Use By Clients of the New York Times News Service
MONTREAL _ Anywhere he goes in Quebec, from a secluded restaurant on the east side of Montreal to the hardware aisles at the Canadian Tire store in suburban St.
Leonard, Claude Meunier makes heads turn.
But if the wildly popular star of Quebec's most watched television program, and the man who helped make Quebec the only place in Canada where Pepsi outsells Coke, happens to step across the provincial border into Ontario or anywhere else in Canada, Meunier's puckish face elicits not the slightest whisper or buzz of excitement.
Language, of course, divides the predominantly French-speaking province of Quebec from most of the rest of Canada _ and the rest of North America, for that matter.
And since Meunier's comedy and commercials are done in French, his audience is basically limited to the province.
But language doesn't completely explain how different this province is from the rest of the United States' largest neighbor, or why at times like these _ when the province is holding critical elections that will determine whether there will be another referendum on separation _ the rest of Canada seems to be so at wit's end trying to understand what is going on here.
Take, for instance, something as trivial as traffic.
Quebec is the only province in Canada that does not allow drivers to make a right turn at a red light.
It never has, in part because transportation officials believe it is not safe, despite the experience of the rest of the country, and most of the United States.
Quebecers stand out in many other ways.
They smoke more, get divorced more and, according to one recent poll by the Southam Newspaper chain, are more stressed out than people in the rest of Canada.
More of them tend to be apartment dwellers, more of them rent their homes rather than own them and more of them rely on electric heat than anywhere else in the country, in part because Quebec produces more hydroelectric power than any other Canadian province.
``For Quebecers, to be different is good, even if it doesn't always make much sense,'' said Ted Nation, an advertising executive who lived and worked in Montreal for many years.
``Being different helps them express who they are''.
But more often than not, the differences are actually reflections of a deep and seemingly unbridgeable abyss that separates the 7 million Quebecers from the 22 million people in the rest of Canada.
``It's not so much a question of character as a perception of history,'' said Lise Bissonnette, a French-Canadian author and former editor of the separatist newspaper Le Devoir.
``It has to do with the way Quebecers see their country and that's the basic difference''.
Keep in mind that this is a province where every automobile license plate bears the fighting words ``Je me souviens'' _ `I remember' _ and where many people have trouble thinking of Quebec as just another province like tiny Prince Edward Island.
Quebec is, they insist, usually invoking the history of New France in North America, a founding partner in the very concept of the nation.
``Basically what makes Quebecers different is that we are trying to help our language and our culture survive, and this keeps us very much alive,'' said Meunier during a lunch-time interview just after he had finished filming the last episode of the season of his series, ``Le Petite Vie'' (which roughly translates to `The Daily Life').
The 47-year-old Montreal comic, whose success allowed him to buy a vacation house in Maine recently, said the tension of sustaining a small island of French in a sea of English speakers in North America gives artists and performers in Quebec a spirit that energizes their work.
That is one reason why the arts flourish in Quebec, even though very little makes its way into the rest of Canada.
According to one recent survey, of 3,500 French books published in Quebec, only 40 were translated into English.
And the record for translating English into French is just as grim.
Quebecers discovered the television program ``Baywatch'' two years later than everyone else in North America, and they still don't know who Ally McBeal is because the show isn't dubbed in French yet.
While most of what the rest of Canada watches on television is produced in the United States, more than 70 percent of prime time programming in Quebec is produced in Canada.
And Meunier's weekly television sitcom is the most popular of all.
The streets are deserted in many French-speaking towns when the show is broadcast Monday evenings at 7:30.
Several episodes this season reached over 3.3 million viewers, out of 4 million people who were watching television at the time, giving the show the equivalent of a weighty 74 share.
By contrast, the recent widely watched interview with Dr.
Jack Kevorkian on ``60 Minutes'' got a 24 market share.
(STORY CAN END HERE.
OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS) ``Le Petite Vie'' began as a proposed 15-minute filler sketch before the Saturday night hockey game on the French service of CBC five years ago.
Meunier, who was already a popular comedian _ and instantly recognizable in the province because of the successful soft drink commercials _ insisted that a full situation comedy based on homespun Quebec characters could succeed, just as the soft drink commercials worked because Quebecers recognized themselves in the spots.
His oddball comedy is a cross between All in the Family and The Simpsons, with him as the father of a strange family and his longtime comedic partner Serge Theriault as the mother.
It is impenetrable to viewers outside of Quebec even if they can understand the heavily accented French.
``It's about life, about Quebecois life,'' he says, but it also stresses universal characteristics like jealousy, immodesty, vanity and arrogance.
It also tends to poke fun at the personality faults that Quebecers know well, he said.
In the most recent episode, which aired just a week before the Nov.
30 elections for control of the provincial government, the characters addressed the serious question of independence in a way that Canadians elsewhere in the nation would have trouble understanding.
``Quebec would become a country like Sweden,'' boasts one character, repeating a promise separatist leaders have used to justify their attempts to create a country with only 7 million people.
``Then I wouldn't vote for independence,'' says the family's daft daughter, ``because it would be full of Ikea things''.
She was referring to the Swedish company that sells furniture that has to be assembled.
``That would mean,'' she says, pursuing logic that makes Quebecers howl, but leaves other Canadians shaking their heads, ``I might not be able to put together my own country.''
OTTAWA, May 15 (Xinhua) --The majority of Canadians believe that the province of Quebec will face partition if it separates from Canada, according to a poll published today.
A Southam News/Compas poll found that up to 78 percent of Canadians outside the French-speaking province anticipate it to lose land as part of the price of independence.
In addition, about 50 percent of Quebecers agree that if Canada is divisible, so is Quebec, according to the poll, which surveyed 2,450 people across the country from May 1 to 7.
The poll found that 92 percent of Canadians living outside Quebec believe the province's Aboriginal people have the right to stay with Canada in the event of a vote for independence.
This view is shared by an overwhelming 75 percent of Quebecers.
The poll results came as the Quebec issue moves to center stage in the ongoing national election campaign.
Further, the results suggest that if Quebecers believe that voting Yes would mean partition, they would be much less likely to vote Yes.
"The issue of partition benefits the federalist side," said Compas chairman Conrad Winn.
"This may explain the sometimes intense reaction of sovereignists to any discussion of the topic".
Before the 1995 referendum, the partition of Quebec was an idea confined to only a few federalist pundits.
The narrow win of the No side by 50.6 percent of the vote made many people to consider seriously what they would do if the Yes side ever won a majority.
"It's the logical answer: if Canada is divisible, so is Quebec," Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chretien noted shortly after the referendum.
MONTREAL _ While the results of Quebec's provincial election are muddy enough for both major parties to claim a victory of sorts, and to bear some degree of defeat, the real losers are those who had hoped the election would provide a clear sense of where Quebec, and Canada, are heading.
Although the separatists were returned to power, they could not even muster a plurality of the popular vote.
The election results keep the independence movement alive, but it is wounded.
That means Premier Lucien Bouchard will not call another wrenching referendum on breaking away from Canada any time soon, though he has not ruled out doing so later.
``Quebecers have said that the time is not propitious for a referendum, at least not immediately,'' Bouchard said Tuesday at a news conference in Quebec.
He is clearly disappointed that he had not increased the number of seats his party holds in the provincial assembly.
Nor was he able to maintain the percentage of the overall vote his party had in the last elections in 1994.
In the final results of Monday's election, his separatist Parti Quebecois won 75 seats, two fewer than in 1994, while the Liberal Party, which favors keeping Quebec in Canada, won 48, an increase of one.
A small third party won one seat, and a special election will be held in a few weeks for one district where the incumbent died recently.
That district is expected to go to the separatists.
In the popular vote, which is seen as an indication of probable strength for sovereignty, the separatists got 42.7 percent, while the Liberals won 43.7 percent.
A clear majority would be needed for a referendum to pass.
But Bouchard refused to rule out completely the possibility of holding another vote on separation.
Instead, he reiterated the position he took during the campaign: that he would call a referendum _ which he has the right to do at any time during his term _ when he could be sure it was winnable.
During the campaign Bouchard did not spell out the conditions under which he would consider the vote winnable, and he skirted the issue again Tuesday.
But he has made it clear that several problems must be tackled before conditions are ripe for another referendum.
Of course, the first was to be re-elected, but the separatists' poorer-than-expected showing suggests that Bouchard will need substantially more time than he had thought to lay the groundwork for another referendum.
``I don't see how Bouchard can call a referendum in the near future,'' said Francois Rocher, a professor of political science at Carleton University in Ottawa.
``He was elected on good government and now he will have to govern''.
Bouchard said the first part of his term would be ``devoted to achieving good government'' that would create winning conditions for a referendum.
He is nearing his goal of eliminating the province's budget deficit, after several years of painful cuts.
Achieving that would be a sign of fiscal responsibility that the separatists would use to build confidence in their ability to lead an independent nation.
(STORY CAN END HERE.
OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS) Beyond the budget, Bouchard will soon have to deal with Quebec's large public employee unions, which have been without a contract since June.
And he is committed to negotiating a new deal with the federal government, along with the leaders of the other nine provinces, for more provincial control over health care and other social programs.
If the negotiations for a new federal relationship break down, Bouchard could blame Ottawa and use resentment toward the federal government to boster support for a referendum.
Bouchard's separatist predecessors as provincial premier committed themselves to holding referendums without taking into account whether conditions were ripe for a victory.
Both previous referendums were defeated, even though support for separation in Quebec has at times risen to around 60 percent.
Tuesday, Bouchard refused to speculate about how long he was willing to wait for his ``winning conditions'' to develop.
He said only that he would ``take the time that it needs''.
During the campaign, some basic assumptions about Quebec were openly questioned for the first time.
The charge by the leader of the Liberal Party, Jean Charest, that 30 years of toying with separation had only hurt Quebec economically resonated with many voters, including some French-speaking Quebecers.
He also called for limits to the provincial government's interference in the economy.
Bouchard will also have to deal with the defection of some soft nationalists _ voters whose support for separation fluctuates _ to the young, third-party candidate, Mario Dumont, leader of the Democratic Action Party.
Dumont, 28, doubled his party's share of the popular vote, although he was the only member who won a seat in the provincial assembly.
He called for a ten-year moratorium on referendums and advocated free market measures, although he did not go as far as Charest.
The extent to which aspects of Quebec life will continue to be overshadowed by politics after the election was made clear early Tuesday.
The Canadian Olympic Committee announced that it had turned down Quebec city in favor of Vancouver's bid to represent Canada in vying for the 2010 winter Olympics.
The vote actually was taken 10 days ago but the announcement of the results was delayed until Tuesday to avoid having any influence on the election.
Quebec politicians wasted no time in calling Tuesday's decision political.
MONTREAL (AP) _ Like ambivalent boxing judges, Quebec voters gave their combative politicians a split decision: the pro-independence government gets another term in power, but with support so tepid that a secession bid is unlikely any time soon.
The separatist Parti Quebecois retained a large legislative majority in Monday's provincial election, winning 75 of the 125 seats to earn a new term of up to five years.
But the anti-separatist Quebec Liberal Party, though winning only 48 seats, received 44 percent of the popular vote to 43 percent for the Parti Quebecois.
As a result, Liberal leader Jean Charest sounded more buoyant in his remarks to supporters than Premier Lucien Bouchard, the separatist leader, did in his victory speech.
``The result tonight...
reflects the fact that the people of Quebec, like the people of all Canada, want this country of ours to work and be a success,'' said Charest, who will serve as opposition leader in the provincial legislature.
The split decision stems from the geographical distribution of political support in Quebec.
Anti-separatist support is concentrated in about 40 districts, mostly around multiethnic Montreal, where the Liberals can rack up huge victory margins.
The separatists, whose backing comes almost entirely from Quebec's French-speaking majority, are competitive in a much larger number of districts spread across the province.
Bouchard, 59, had campaigned on the pledge that he would _ if returned to power _ call for a referendum on seceding from Canada whenever he felt conditions were right for a separatist victory.
But with only 43-percent support for his party, Bouchard is likely to shelve any immediate push for a referendum and concentrate instead on policies that will build public confidence.
``There is no question that this vote was a vote to elect a government, not a vote to determine the future of Quebec or the future of the country,'' said Brian Tobin, the premier of Newfoundland.
``I wouldn't expect with these results that Mr.
Bouchard will be thinking of a referendum any time soon, if ever''.
Bouchard paid tribute to his opponents' determination and pledged to work with them on policy matters.
But he also promised to work for the ``winning conditions'' that would make independence possible eventually.
``Our first priority is to advance Quebec ...
to push it farther toward its destiny,'' he said.
In Washington, U.S.
State Department spokesman James P.
Rubin reaffirmed U.S. support for an undivided Canada.
``The United States recognizes this is an internal issue for Canadians to resolve within their constitutional, legal and political system,'' he said.
``We have always valued our close and productive relationship with a strong and united Canada''.
Canada's federal government kept a low profile during the 33-day campaign, not wanting to undercut Charest in a province where many francophones are traditionally wary of federal intentions.
Prime Minister Jean Chretien assured Bouchard of cooperation in helping strengthen Quebec's economy and social services.
``But when he talks about bringing together his famous winning conditions, which he refuses to reveal, to hold another referendum on separation, he should know we will defend our country,'' Chretien said.
As a personality, the charismatic Bouchard is by far the most popular politician in Quebec.
But many Quebeckers who voted for his party are not keen on secession; recent polls indicated about 70 percent didn't want another referendum.
One of the most notable results of the election was the strong showing of Democratic Action, the No.
3 party that drew 12 percent of the vote behind its 28-year-old leader, Mario Dumont.
The party, which appeals to many young voters, favors greater autonomy for Quebec but stops short of advocating outright secession.
``Mr. Bouchard's mandate is clear _ to provide good government and represent Quebec's interests,'' Dumont said.
``He was not elected to do a referendum on sovereignty.
Quebeckers want constitutional peace''.
The separatists have lost two previous secession referendums, by a big margin in 1980 and a narrow margin in 1995.
Bouchard is intent on avoiding a third defeat, and won a power struggle with party hard-liners earlier this year by insisting he would call another referendum only if opinion polls showed the separatists would win.
About 80 percent of the 5.2 million eligible voters cast ballots in Monday's election, high by North American standards but down from 93 percent for the 1995 referendum.
About 83 percent of Quebec's 7.4 million people are French speakers.
The rest are divided among English-speakers with long-term roots in Canada and more recently arrived immigrants from southern Europe, Asia and elsewhere.
The long-term crusade for Quebec independence stems from a feeling among many French Quebeckers that their culture is different from the rest of Canada, plus a yearning to manage their own affairs and have their own national symbols .
QUEBEC _ A Quebecer returning home this week after a few years' absence would be thoroughly confused by the campaign posters lining the highways leading to this provincial capital.
Signs that prominently feature the blue and white fleur-de-lis flag, the provocative symbol of the Quebec separatist movement, this time belong to the anti-separation Liberal Party and its leader, Jean Charest.
And neither a fleur-de-lis nor the color blue is on any of the posters for the separatist Parti Quebecois, and the current premier of Quebec, Lucien Bouchard.
Instead, the primary color used is a muddy green, which is supposed to stand for hope.
Both the Liberals and the Parti Quebecois hope that when the vote takes place Monday in all 125 ridings, or districts, around the province, Quebecers will be able to clearly distinguish between the two parties and their positions.
But the reversal of symbols on the campaign posters is just one of many reversals in a campaign that has distracted voters, confounded experts and added a thick layer of ambiguity to one of the continent's most baffling political landscapes.
The campaign itself has lasted only 33 days _ the shortest ever in Quebec _ but in that time Charest and the Liberals have steadily lost support.
Charest, the former leader of the federal Conservative Party, arrived in Quebec this year as the great federalist hope whom the rest of Canada had recruited to banish the separatists.
But he seems to have gone from hero to goat, with the latest polls showing the Liberals headed for a stinging defeat.
``He has failed to become the leading contender for Quebec's champion against Ottawa,'' said Desmond Morton, director of the Institute for the Study of Canada at McGill University in Montreal.
During the campaign, Bouchard attacked Charest relentlessly and raised doubts about how well he really knew Quebec, since Charest had been away from the province for so long, Morton said.
Charest ``often looked hot-tempered and crotchety against the man many Quebecers see as a secular saint,'' he said.
Bouchard, who was practically canonized here after losing a leg to flesh-eating disease in 1994, did not run an unassailable campaign.
In the last four years that his Parti Quebecois has controlled the provincial assembly, it has tried to balance the provincial budget by closing hospitals and making deep cuts in hallowed social spending programs like education.
Those cuts have angered many, presenting the Liberals with ample targets.
``Bouchard had trouble almost every day of the campaign,'' Morton said.
``But he was always able to capitalize on his ability to get out his message through a largely sympathetic media''.
Even when it dealt with the fundamental issue of separation, that message was not always clear.
Bouchard had at first vowed that if he was re-elected, he would hold another referendum.
In the last referendum, in 1995, the separatist question was narrowly defeated, but Quebec law prohibits a government from holding more than one referendum during a term that usually lasts four to five years.
As surveys showed that Quebecers _ for whom Monday's election is the sixth in six years _ were overwhelmingly against holding another referendum, Bouchard's position wavered.
He promised a referendum only when ``winning conditions'' prevailed, but never defined those terms.
Later in the campaign, he said he would negotiate a new arrangement on social spending with Ottawa, a ``renewed federalism'' that seemed the polar opposite of previous separation threats.
Some voters were confused, others angry.
``Ambiguity wins in Quebec,'' a Montreal radio talk show host, Gord Logan, proclaimed during the campaign.
Charest left no doubt that he was against a referendum.
Using the fleur-de-lis on campaign posters was his way of taking back the powerful image from the separatists.
But in the end, Charest's straightforwardness may have cost him support even among people who said they would vote against separation.
After 30 years of the separatist movement, many Quebecers have developed sophisticated positions on independence that at times can puzzle outsiders.
Louis Balthazar, a professor of political science at Laval University, said many Quebec voters hedged their bets.
They do not necessarily want to separate from Canada, but they expect their leaders to use the threat of separation as leverage to bargain with the federal government for more provincial powers.
And so, Balthazar continued, even Quebecers who want to stay in Canada will vote for the Parti Quebecois, which officially embraces separation, to maintain this perceived advantage.
Thus, Bouchard could not necessarily count the support he wins on Monday as support for a referendum.
``Right now, a PQ victory would not translate into a future winning referendum,'' Balthazar said.
He said he believed that Quebecers would vote for Bouchard because of the way he has managed Quebec, not because he will make it an independent nation.
Jean-Marc Leger, president of Le Groupe Leger &AMP; Leger, a Montreal polling company, said that if the Parti Quebecois picks up more seats in the provincial assembly than the 77 it now controls, and exceeds 50 percent of the popular vote, it will be encouraged to call for a referendum in the coming year.
Polls indicate that voters now see Bouchard's separatist government as standing for stability while it is Charest's Liberals who represent radical change.
That is in large part because at the beginning of the campaign, Charest said he would diminish the provincial government's role in Quebec's economy and open it up to market forces.
OTTAWA, August 27 (Xinhua) --Canada's unity minister Stephane Dion has fired off another volley of words at Quebec's separatist government in an emotional debate over the province's future.
In his latest letter to the Quebec government, Canadian Intergovernmental Affairs Minister Stephane Dion warned that Quebec's unilateral secession from Canada would be not only illegal, but impossible.
"Without the support of the Canadian government, a declaration of independence would not be recognized by the international community," Dion wrote in the four-page letter, which was published today.
"Since 1945, no state created by secession has been admitted to the United Nations without the approval of the government of the predecessor state," the minister noted.
In Quebec, Premier Lucien Bouchard countered that Dion "is not allowed to speak for the international community".
"He can speak for himself, maybe for the federal government but surely not for the world," Bouchard told reporters.
The letter was Dion's second within two weeks in an blistering exchange of words between Ottawa and the French-speaking province, which has been threatening to form a country of its own.
The on-going war of words started when Quebec Premier Bouchard sharply rebuked New Brunswick Premier Frank McKenna for appearing to support the partition of Quebec if it secedes.
In his first letter to Premier Bouchard, the unity minister warned that if Canada is divisible, so is Quebec.
"Neither you nor I nor anyone else can predict that the borders of an independent Quebec would be those now guaranteed by the Canadian Constitution," Dion wrote.
The Inuit and the Cree natives of northern Quebec, and some English-speaking residents in western Quebec and Montreal has said they want to remain in Canada if Quebec votes to break away from the country.
Dion also asserted that Quebec cannot simply decide unilaterally to separate from the Canadian federation.
He rejected the notion that 50-percent-plus-one majority Yes vote would be suffice for the province to leave Canada.
To this, Quebec deputy premier Bernard Landry shot back with a letter, denouncing Dion's letter as anti-democratic and an attempt to "change the rules of the game".
Analysts here say the latest letter-writings by Dion suggest that Ottawa is warming up for another showdown with Quebec.
Ottawa has already asked the Supreme Court of Canada to declare that a unilateral declaration of independence would be unlawful.
The case is scheduled to begin this fall.
It is widely expected that Quebec will hold a provincial election next year.
If Bouchard and his Parti Quebecois win, the election would be very likely to be followed by another referendum on Quebec's future.
"We are heading towards a new referendum, and there's going to be more heat," predicted Professor Benoit Pelletier of the University of Ottawa.
There is already speculation that Ottawa is toughening its stance on Quebec, focusing less on the so-called "Plan A", which involves reconciliation, and more on "Plan B", which stresses "rules of secession."
OTTAWA, August 20 (Xinhua) --The Supreme Court of Canada ruled here Thursday that Quebec can't separate from the country unilaterally.
In its historic ruling on the Quebec issue, the 9-member court said, the mainly French-speaking province cannot separate from Canada under the Constitution of Canada and the international law.
But the top court said, the Canadian government would be obliged to negotiate with Quebec if the mainly French-speaking province won a voter referendum on independence.
OTTAWA, March 14 (Xinhua) --The Canadian House of Commons Monday began voting on a bill aimed at making separation attempts more difficult.
Members of the parliament are expected to spend about 30 straight hours in the process of voting 411 amendments to the draft legislation, which was tabled last December by the ruling Liberal government.
The Bloc Quebecois, the only party uniformly opposed to the bill, has proposed 403 amendments while the other three opposition parties added eight more to stall the legislation.
The roll-call voting will last until Wednesday morning as every MP rises in turn for a total of 411 times to signify their vote.
Dubbed Clarity Bill, the Liberal government's Bill C-20 enshrines into law a 1998 Supreme Court decision that found Quebec must win a clear majority from a clearly-worded question before it can separate from Canada.
"We need a clear question and a clear majority," said Prime Minister Jean Chretien last December.
The Clarity Bill immediately met with a counter-attack from Quebec separatists who unveiled legislation in Quebec City reaffirming their right to declare independence in the fashion it sees fit.
OTTAWA, October 1 (Xinhua) --A majority of Canadians support the new national unity initiative proposed in Calgary last month, according to a new poll published today.
However, they don't think the Calgary accord will make much difference in terms of keeping the French-speaking Province of Quebec in Canada.
The accord, reached last month in Calgary by all provincial premiers, excluding Quebec premier, and two territorial leaders, affirmed Quebec's "unique character" while stressing the principles of equality of all Canadians and provinces.
The province has been seeking independence from Canada since a near victory for separatists in a 1995 independence referendum.
The poll showed that 70 percent of those surveyed regard the accord as a step in the right direction, while 24 percent say it was a mistake for the premiers to reopen the national unity issue.
In Quebec, 62 percent of respondents say the accord is a right step, while 32 percent regard it as a mistake.
Meanwhile, 57 percent of Canadians think the efforts by the premiers, backed by Prime Minister Jean Chretien, will have no real impact on the possibility of Quebec's stay or separation.
Within Quebec, a slim majority say the accord does not alter their view on the province's future course.
Chretien, a French-speaking Quebecker who has worked tirelessly to keep Canada united, said the premiers demonstrated responsible leadership.
The poll by Angus Reid Group is the first national poll on attitudes toward the Calgary accord.
The survey of 1,500 Canadians was taken on September 23-30 and is considered accurate within 2.5 percentage points.
OTTAWA, May 15 (Xinhua) --Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chretien has ruled out the possibility that the French-speaking province of Quebec could declare independence even if a majority of Quebeckers vote for secession in the next referendum.
"We are saying that the laws of Canada must be respected, that there won't be a unilateral declaration of independence and that international law must also be respected," Chretien told the House of Commons Tuesday.
The remarks were among the most aggressive and explicit Chretien has made on how the federal government intends to deal with a third independence referendum in Quebec, according to today's Globe and Mail newspaper.
They also signal a tougher approach toward Quebec separatists following their near-victory in the most recent referendum on October 30, the paper said.
Chretien's statement came amid a row between Ottawa and the separatist government of Quebec over a court case challenging the legality of future referenda on Quebec's independence.
The federal government is arguing that a referendum is a "consultation", not the first legal step out of the confederation.
It also maintains that Canada's constitution would have to be amended to allow Quebec to secede, which would require the consent of all other provinces.
Michel Gauthier, leader of the separatist Bloc Quebecois, lashed out at Chretien Tuesday, accusing him of subordinating the democratic will of Quebeckers to the approval of Canada's other provinces.
Chretien is creating a climate of "confrontation" similar to that of 1981 and 1982, when the constitution was amended against Quebec's wishes, Gauthier warned.
LONGUEUIL, Quebec _ Chanted slogans flowed, cheers rose, fleur-de-lis flags flapped everywhere.
Although the gathering was just another campaign rally as Quebec roars toward tomorrow's election showdown between separatists and federalists, it seemed more like old home day for the secessionist cause.
Video screens played and replayed images of the triumphs of the Parti Quebecois, which in the three decades since its founding by the late Rene Levesque has grown from a fringe movement to Quebec's most powerful political party.
Levesque's widow was on hand.
So was a living legend, poet-songwriter Gilles Vigneault _ the Woody Guthrie of Quebec nationalism _ whose daughter, Jessica, gave quavering voice to a song with the refrain, ``Tomorrow belongs to us''.
And the crowd roared back, ``We want a country''!
At the center of it all was Lucien Bouchard, Quebec's 59-year-old premier.
He is a passionate articulator of the separatist vision, and the bete noire of English Canada, vowing that the province that already considers itself a nation in spirit will soon become a nation in fact.
Perhaps very soon.
``We are a people, and a people has the right to be a country,'' he said.
``Give me the mandate so that, finally, we can say `Yes' to ourselves once and for all''.
Quebec and Canada face a crucial test tomorrow as Quebecers go to the polls in the first provincewide elections since the separatists narrowly lost a referendum on independence in 1995.
Going head-to-head in the race are Bouchard and the Liberal Party challenger, Jean Charest, 40, the only federalist champion given any chance of unseating the separatists.
But to the shock of Canadians, who only a few weeks ago were gleefully predicting a rout of the secessionist government in Quebec City, Charest has failed to catch fire with voters.
The waning hours of the campaign are looking more like a cakewalk for the separatists.
Quebec is the only Canadian province with a French majority, 80 percent of 7.3 million people, and surveys have shown that about two-thirds of French speakers support either outright secession or some degree of sovereignty from the rest of Canada.
Should the separatists win, as the latest polls suggest, Canada's future as an intact nation will be cast into doubt as Bouchard presses Quebec toward what he calls its ``natural destiny''.
Still, Quebec is notorious for last-minute shifts in the political wind.
If the federalists somehow snatch victory against all odds, Bouchard will almost certainly resign from politics.
With no other separatist leader in sight capable of matching his popularity, the dream of Quebec independence would be smashed, perhaps forever.
That is an outcome that the rest of Canada fervently desires.
Polls showed a dead heat only a few months ago when Charest, cast as a white knight riding to the rescue of embattled federalism, yielded to an unprecedented draft movement, quitting a safe seat in national Parliament to return to his native Quebec to do battle.
Poll after poll found Charest to be the only politician capable of beating Bouchard.
The timing seemed perfect.
For the same polls also showed Quebecers wearying of the ``neverendum referendum,'' as Montreal humorist Josh Freed has dubbed the seemingly endless quest for nationhood.
From the start, Charest hammered the theme of Quebec uselessly dissipating its energies on an impossible scheme.
He rhetorically asked audiences the question that seems to mystify everyone except Quebecers: Why should this bountiful province seek to quit one of the world's most prosperous, successful democracies?
``How long must Quebecers keep pulling this ball and chain''? he said last week as the 33-day official campaign season ticked down toward a ballot box reckoning.
``We must end a political debate that perpetuates uncertainty, which will be paid for by our children''.
But Quebecers, or at least French Quebecers, responded with a yawn.
Despite Charest's charisma and eloquence, the federalist crusade has fizzled _ in large part because the native son, upon returning home, strikes many Quebecers as a stranger.
Or, worse, just a front man for English Canada.
``All the cheering from the rest of Canada when Mr.
Charest went to Quebec did him no good in the province,'' observed Jeffrey Simpson, national affairs columnist for the Globe and Mail, a nationally circulated newspaper.
Indeed, Bouchard won points simply by mocking Charest's notion of Quebec comfortably cradled in the arms of Canada: ``Jean Charest is a man who denies Quebec as it is, in its profound identity.
... Quebec will never resign itself to being a province like the others''.
Charest made a dangerous decision by portraying himself as a political outsider in a province that fears the outside above all else.
The entire history of Quebec might be told as a desperate struggle for the survival of its unique, French-rooted culture against English North America.
After years in Ottawa, preoccupied with national politics, Charest seems to have forgotten that even Quebecers opposed to secession don't carry much love for Canada in their hearts.
``Myself, I am not truly a separatist, but I will vote Parti Quebecois because I trust Mr.
Bouchard to look after the interests of Quebec first and foremost,'' said Marc Trudel, 43, a Quebec City schoolteacher.
``Mr. Charest seems too comfortable with Canada.
We can never trust the English provinces''.
Polls consistently show that Quebecers are sick of referendums on independence.
And to the rest of Canada, and Charest's supporters in Quebec, secession is such a soul-searing issue that it was assumed that weariness with referendums must necessarily translate into a big vote for the federalists.
But to French Quebecers, separatism is one issue among many.
Even those who think secession is a bad idea will support the Parti Quebecois if the party seems to serve the greater good of the province.
And the fact is, Bouchard has done a topnotch job of running Quebec _ unemployment is down, exports to the United States are up, government spending has been curtailed, and Montreal is rocketing back as one of the most dynamic cities in Canada.
``Generally speaking, people feel better economically,'' said Jean-Marc Leger of the Quebec polling firm Leger &AMP; Leger.
Surveys released last week show that Quebecers believe Bouchard is honest, dedicated, hard-working, and, perhaps above all, the one politician capable of forcing Canada to show respect for its most willful and wayward province.
Meanwhile, Charest's federalist campaign was undercut from the start by comments from Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chretien, who told a Quebec newspaper, La Presse, that Canada would not seek changes in federal law to give Quebec special political powers and protections.
A new constitutional formula is widely considered the only way to keep Quebec from bolting the 131-year-old Canadian confederation.
Charest is likely to score an impressive victory in Montreal, with its cosmopolitan population of English Quebecers, Jews, and ethnic voters _ such as Chinese and East Indians _ who loathe the French language laws of the separatist government nearly as much as they despise the secessionist impulse.
Similarly, Bouchard is sure to win big in the separatist heartland north of Quebec City.
The real battle for Quebec is being fought in the St.
Lawrence River valley between Montreal and the provincial capital, in faded centers such as Trois Rivieres, Longueuil, and Cap-de-la-Madeline.
And on this vital front, things look bleak for Charest.
``To me, it's not about separation but standing tall against Canada,'' said Valerie Corbeil, a 34-year-old beautician in gritty Trois-Rivieres.
``Mr. Charest seems a nice man.
But I fear he would let Quebecers become like Cajuns in Louisiana _ colorful characters with bad French and no power''.
An impressive separatist win would make it a near certainty that Bouchard will launch another referendum on independence, possibly as early as next year.
He has pledged to put the issue before Quebecers again only in the event of ``winning conditions,'' by which he apparently means a Quebec that is economically sound enough to weather breaking away from Canada.
The election is being closely followed not only in Ottawa but Washington, Paris, London, and other capitals, although many Americans seem generally oblivious to the political drama unfurling north of New England.
``Americans tend to think the absence of bombs and bullets means no crisis,'' said one Canada-based foreign diplomat.
``But Canada is drifting toward a very serious situation.
The federal government has basically lost ability to influence events in Quebec''.
Earlier this year, in a landmark Canadian Supreme Court case that backfired badly on the federal government, the nation's nine high judges ruled that Canada cannot prevent the secession of Quebec if a ``clear majority'' of Quebecers opt for independence.
``We have won so many battles,'' Bouchard told a cheering audience last week.
``We have only one more to win.
Let's win it and give to our children a Quebec that is fully responsible for its own destiny.''
MONTREAL _ With popular support for Quebec's independence in remission, Prime Minister Jean Chretien of Canada made a bold gamble with his country's future last week, introducing legislation that lays out Canada's first road map for national division, but one so littered with obstacles that he bets the separatists will never follow it.
The new legislation, which requires a ``clear majority'' voting on a ``clear question'' on secession, is the direct outgrowth of what many Canadians now call their nation's ``near death experience,'' the 1995 Quebec referendum that unity forces won by a margin of just 1 percent.
Since that high point for separation, polls in Quebec indicated this fall that support for independence receded to a 10-year low, around 40 percent.
At the same time, popular support for the separatists' provincial government, headed by Premier Lucien Bouchard, fell to the lowest point in its five-year history, around 37 percent.
In a new poll commissioned by Actualite magazine, 74 percent of Quebec residents interviewed predicted that their province would remain in Canada ``forever''.
Giving unity a nudge, Bill Clinton and Jacques Chirac, leaders of the two foreign countries that the people of Quebec most care about, the United States and France, came to Quebec this fall and pointedly praised Canada's federal system of government.
Public opinion in Quebec is known to be volatile, as allies reminded Chretien when he prepared his ``clarity'' legislation in recent weeks.
The veteran prime minister, who entered politics when John F.
Kennedy was in the White House, said he knew best.
``Canada is my business, sir,'' Chretien, a Quebec native, snapped at a reporter who asked him about stirring up the separatists.
``And it is the future of Canada that is at stake''.
While the bill introduced by the 65-year-old prime minister might seem innocuous to many Americans, it provoked what one columnist described as ``World War II headlines''.
The bill, intended to carry out a Supreme Court decision from last year, authorizes the House of Commons in Ottawa to rule on the clarity of any secessionist question adopted by a provincial legislature.
It also allows Canada's lower house to decide whether the referendum results constituted a ``clear majority''.
Such seemingly inoffensive language immediately provoked a string of retorts from Parti Quebecois leaders, including ``brutal,'' ``Soviet-style,'' and an old standby: ``straitjacket''.
On one level, Quebecers of many political stripes believe that it is entirely up to their provincial legislature to set the rules for a referendum that would decide the political future of Quebec, Canada's largest province.
Across political lines, the people of Quebec are galled by the idea that legislators from as far away as the Yukon would have veto power over the future of Canada's oldest European society.
In a reflection of broad Quebec opposition to ``outside interference,'' criticism has come from the local leader of Chretien's Liberal Party, Jean Charest, a provincial legislator who leads in public opinion polls in the race to become Quebec's next premier.
Quebec Liberals and Parti Quebecois legislators may adopt a common front against the bill.
But, below the surface, separatists deeply fear being locked into a clear referendum question.
In the two secession referendums, the proposal was deliberately phrased in ambiguous terms.
Vague phrases like ``sovereignty,'' ``partnership'' and ``association'' were used to draw under one tent people known as ``soft secessionists'' interested in the kind of autonomy now enjoyed by Scotland and hard-liners who want to create an independent French-speaking republic on the northern border of New England.
In focus groups, support for breaking away from Canada plummeted when questioners used words like ``secession'' and ``independence''.
Indeed, polls of Quebecers who voted yes to ``sovereignty'' in 1995 indicated that about one-third believed that they would still be able to keep their Canadian passports and to send members of Parliament to Ottawa.
But last year, Jacques Parizeau, who was Quebec's premier in 1995, revealed that he had harbored other plans.
He wrote in his memoirs that he had typed up a unilateral declaration of independence and that he had won from the French government a commitment to recognize an independent Quebec and to exert diplomatic pressure on other French-speaking nations to follow suit.
Such revelations stiffened Chretien's resolve to establish clear rules of the game.
``They ask a crooked question,'' the prime minister told reporters.
``Fine. So what?
There will be no negotiations''.
The ``Clarity Act'' also underlines the need for negotiations over a series of issues that secessionists generally prefer to leave fuzzy, particularly the problem of English-speaking areas' seceding from any newly independent Quebec.
Before a province could say goodbye to Canada, it would have to negotiate with Ottawa and the other nine provinces its share of Canada's $400 billion debt, its borders and its plans to guarantee the rights of Indians and linguistic minorities.
If the results of the 1995 vote were used as a map, an independent Quebec would lose most of its border areas with the United States and Ontario, heavily English-speaking areas that voted no.
In addition, it would lose the top half of the province as Quebec's Indian and Inuit inhabitants overwhelmingly oppose breaking ties with Ottawa.
(STORY CAN END HERE.
OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS) nn The stage may now be set for a major flare-up of secessionist sentiment.
Last weekend, leaders of Quebec's powerful labor and student movements appealed on provincial television for a ``mobilization'' of the old sovereignty coalition.
Chretien's new bill ``is hateful, a spitting in the face of democracy,'' Marc Laviolette, president of the Confederation of National Trade Unions, said in remarks repeated over and over again on television.
``The best way to defend the interest of the province's workers would be to have our own country''.
But the labor leaders were the same ones who, two months ago, nearly called a provincewide strike against the austerity program of the secessionist Bouchard government.
Contributing to general dissatisfaction with Quebec's government, in the last six months there have been a strike by nurses and official audits showing that the government wasted millions of dollars trying to run a day care program, a manpower training program and a buyout of provincial employees.
And Chretien introduced his bill at a time that was hardly propitious for street demonstrations: students are dispersing for Christmas vacations and workers are visibly obsessed with the shopping countdown to the holiday.
``People just don't care,'' lamented Michel Venne, a columnist for a separatist newspaper here, Le Devoir.
Noting that polls this fall indicated that 70 percent of Quebecers did not want another referendum, he said: ``It is going to be difficult to mobilize people.''
OTTAWA, November 30 (Xinhua) --Quebec's ruling Parti Quebecois (PQ) won enough seats to form a majority government in Monday's general election in the French-speaking province of Canada.
The separatist PQ, led by Lucien Bouchard, won 75 seats in Quebec's 125-seat provincial legislature, according to the latest reports from the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (CBC).
PQ's main rival, the Liberal Party led by Jean Charest, got 48 seats, while the Action Democratique party secured one seat from a total of 124 seats up for grabs on Monday, CBC reported.
The 125th seat will be decided in a by-election in December because of the recent death of the PQ candidate.
The current election mirrored the results from the 1994 election, when the PQ won 77 seats, the Liberal 47 and the Action Democratique party one seat.
The re-election of the PQ government was widely believed to have much impact on the future of both Quebec and the country of Canada as a whole.
In the 33-day campaign, PQ leader Bouchard maintained that if re-elected, his government would seek another referendum on Quebec independence from Canada when "winning conditions" exist.
But in his speech to cheering supporters Monday night, Bouchard only briefly mentioned the referendum issue, while dwelling on good government and attacks on Canada's federal government.
"We also sought a mandate to get conditions for a winning referendum on Quebec sovereignty," Bouchard said of the referendum issue.
In Ottawa late Monday night, Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chretien said his government will cooperate with the re-elected Bouchard government if the latter respected the desire of Quebecers to improve economic conditions.
"But when he (Bouchard) talks about bringing together his famous winning conditions, which he refuses to reveal, to hold another referendum on separation, he should know we will defend our country," Chretien warned.
Recent polls also indicated that more than 60 percent of Quebec people did not want to see another referendum in the near future.
In the previous two referendums in 1980 and 1995, Quebecers twice voted "No" to the province's secession from the Canadian confederation.
While conceding his defeat, Liberal leader Jean Charest said that both Canadians and Quebecers could take heart from the result of the election.
"The result tonight...
reflects the fact that the people of Quebec, like the people of all Canada, want this country of ours to work and be a success," he noted .
OTTAWA, August 28 (Xinhua) --The Supreme Court of Canada is set to hear the case of Quebec separation in early December, according to a draft agenda released today.
The court has set aside December 8, 9 and 10 to hear arguments on whether the French-speaking province has the right to break away the country.
The Quebec government said that it will not participate in the case.
Canada's federal government has asked the court to rule on three subjects: --Can Quebec unilaterally declare independence under domestic law? -- Does International law give the province a right to secede? -- If domestic and international law conflict, which take precedence?
Quebec cannot unilaterally declare independence though it could leave lawfully through a constitutional amendment after discussing with the federal government and other provinces, Ottawa argues.
But Quebec insists that any decision on independence must be made only by the people of Quebec.
The case is viewed here as part of Ottawa's "Plan B" strategy, which stresses "rules of secession".
JONQUIERE, Quebec _ Both men left the confines of Quebec for federal politics years ago.
Both served in the Cabinet of Prime Minister Brian Mulroney.
Both later switched parties and both have come home to fight for the future of Canada's French-speaking province.
But whatever similarities once existed between them have faded.
Lucien Bouchard, the premier of Quebec, and Jean Charest, the leader of the province's Liberal Party, are now locked in a do-or-die election that on Nov.
30 will decide, to a large extent, whether Quebec's long flirtation with secession will succeed at last.
Bouchard has promised that if his Parti Quebecois is re-elected he will hold a third referendum on separation, probably by 2001.
The last referendum, in 1995, fell just 50,000 votes short of authorizing Quebec to negotiate its way out of Canada.
Charest says there will be no referendum if he is premier.
Many political analysts say that could take away the separatists' last opportunity to win, because passion for independence is waning.
The continuing exodus of English speakers is largely offset by the declining local birth rate, and the large influx of immigrants tends to vote against secession.
``If Quebec hasn't solved this problem'' in the next few years, said Alain Dubuc, chief editorial writer for La Presse, a Montreal daily newspaper, ``completely different rules will apply''.
Bouchard, 59, is a passionate separatist.
He is a sometimes hotheaded francophone as independent as is Jonquiere, the rugged area on the fierce Saguenay River that Quebecers proudly consider their frontier.
It is a place of oversized dimensions _ of huge aluminum smelters, prodigious paper mills and uncontainable ambition for Quebec independence _ all reflected in the fiery character of Bouchard.
He is determined to carry Quebec to what he sees as its destiny as an independent, French-speaking nation in North America.
Charest, 40, is a curly-haired federalist who is as comfortably bilingual as is Sherbrooke, his home in the Eastern Townships near the Vermont-New Hampshire border.
It is a place where English- and French-speaking families have long lived side by side, a place so accommodating that English street signs include French footnotes, like Rue Wellington, ``General Britannique, 1769-1852''.
Charest was leader of the federal Progressive Conservative Party before being drafted by supporters to take on Bouchard and vanquish the separatist threat.
He has staked his promising political career on the crusade to keep Quebec in Canada.
If Quebec were to vote for secession, a complicated series of negotiations would follow to settle such questions as the province's share of the national debt and compensation for federal properties.
There would also be a bitter fight over what to do with areas of the province that do not want to leave Canada, particularly northern lands that are home to Cree Indians who have voted overwhelmingly against separation.
So far opinion polls have the Liberals and the Parti Quebecois running just about even, with the separatists recently pulling slightly ahead.
Under Quebec's parliamentary system, Bouchard and Charest run in their local districts, but as party leader either automatically becomes premier if his party gains a majority.
English-speaking Quebecers are bunched in Montreal and the Eastern Townships.
If current trends continue, the Liberals will not win the majority of legislative seats that they need to form the next government.
Jean-Marc Leger, president of Leger &AMP; Leger, a Montreal polling company, said a Charest victory would turn demographics against the separatists.
But he expects Bouchard to win, and he said the margin of victory would affect the timetable for a referendum.
``If Bouchard gets 45, 46 percent of the vote, I'm not sure he would try a referendum,'' Leger said.
``But if he gets 48, 49 percent, he would hold one for sure.
If he gets more than 50 percent, and it's possible, he will have a referendum within six months''.
Charest concedes nothing.
``This is a campaign, period,'' he said.
``We're in a battle, period.
And in the best sense of the word, it's democracy at work, and we are going to win''.
Bouchard, bolstered by the polls, has assumed an air of confidence.
``The only true solution for Quebec,'' he said, ``is Quebec sovereignty''.
(STORY CAN END HERE.
OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS) nn The disparate outlooks of these two Quebecers can best be understood by looking at the places they call home.
They came from opposite ends of Quebec, where history has shaped destiny and character is formed by memory.
The Saguenay region where Bouchard was reared is in the distant northern hills.
Bouchard, who until he was 46 never saw any other part of Canada except the next-door province of Ontario, is typical of many people here for whom Quebec is already a nation.
``There is an excess of pride in this area, and it's a mixed blessing,'' said Rejeanne Gilbert of Jonquiere, who was having her hair styled at the Coiffures Signature salon on Rue St.
Dominique, which is awash with small shops and countless beauty parlors.
``That pride is why we have the kind of politics we have here, and why there are so many hairdressers''.
Jonquiere is an unassuming town of 56,000, with an average income of $15,300 and 11.7 percent unemployment, higher than the 8.3 percent national average.
Like Mrs.
Gilbert, most here speak only French.
People are used to good jobs in big companies like Alcan Aluminum, which receives subsidized electricity from Quebec's hydroelectric plants.
Lynda Dufour, owner of Coiffures Signature, called the Saguenay socially and culturally cut off not just from the rest of Canada, but also the rest of Quebec.
``If you come from the Saguenay, people in the rest of Quebec think you are from so far away that you still have feathers on your head,'' she said.
This is often called the cradle of the separatist movement, which emerged in the 1960s.
``We here have to fight a little harder than those elsewhere to succeed,'' said Marc Andre Bedard, a minister in the government of the province's first separatist premier, Rene Levesque.
``Mr. Bouchard is very much a son of the area, a man of strong roots, conviction and determination''.
Bouchard, who speaks English with a French accent and is married to an American, is also the leader of a government that has had to reduce a crushing deficit by cutting education and health services that Quebecers take for granted.
He has closed many hospitals, and services at the one in Jonquiere were scheduled to be severely cut back.
But when he returned to Jonquiere earlier this month for his formal nomination, doctors threatened to resign if the cuts went through.
Bouchard offered them enough money to call off the threat, but that angered other communities that saw it as favoritism.
There have been other embarrassing moments for Bouchard, including the disclosure of a study showing that government cuts had caused poor and mentally ill patients to go without medication.
So far, though, the revelations do not seem to have hurt Bouchard.
He is the most popular and respected politician in French-speaking Quebec.
In 1994 he was hospitalized with a flesh-eating infection, to which he eventually lost a leg.
He came out of the hospital to lead separatist forces in the 1995 referendum, and when the premier at the time resigned, he took over.
``Bouchard is a man of pride and honor,'' said Mario Arcette, 21, a nurse in Jonquiere.
``And he wants Quebec to be like himself, proud and honorable''.
Pride and honor persist in the Eastern Townships as well, but it is the pride of coexistence and the honor of accepting differences.
The area was settled by Loyalist families who fled the United States during and after the Revolutionary War.
They were encouraged to live where they could most easily defend Canada from invasion.
Though not without some tensions, English and French have long lived side by side.
Many people in Sherbrooke are fluently bilingual, like Nicole Girard.
``If you are bilingual you tend not to be as extreme,'' she said one morning at a local cafe.
``You don't have as much prejudice, and you can understand the other side a little better''.
Sherbrooke is the biggest city in the Eastern Townships, so named because they lie east of the St.
Lawrence River.
It is a city of 76,700 residents, with an average income of $14,400 and 11 percent unemployment.
Separatists do not find much support here.
``They want to be separatist so nobody makes them do anything,'' said Lina Jacques of nearby Lennoxville.
``But Quebec is too small to just think, `I'm going to live in this province and nowhere else'''.
Charest's own family is a model of coexistence, with an Irish mother and a French-speaking father who was a local businessman and political leader.
The candidate married a local girl and is fluent in French and English.
``If you live here you believe the two communities can live together with respect and humanity,'' said Paul Milliard, assistant director of the local Charest campaign.
``And Jean Charest is proof of that''.
Charest and Bouchard are known to dislike each other, a disaffection that dates back to their days together in the Mulroney Cabinet.
In his campaign, Charest has accused Bouchard of recklessly pursuing another referendum even though opinion polls show that Quebecers overwhelmingly oppose it.
Bouchard has responded with a politically ambiguous promise to hold another referendum _ the priority issue in his party's platform _ only when winning conditions exist.
That essentially allows him to keep the separation option open.
Charest has alienated some Quebecers by ruling out a referendum entirely, thus surrendering Quebec's leverage with Ottawa.
And the Parti Quebcois continues to portray him as an outsider from Ottawa.
In the campaign's only debate, on Tuesday night, Charest testily defended his credentials as a local boy.
``A Quebecer from Sherbrooke is no less a Quebecer than someone from Jonquiere,'' he said.
While the rest of Canada considers this a crucial election, even the staunchest Quebec separatists concede that some passion has gone out of the secession movement.
That was evident at Nephtys Tattos on Rue Wellington in Sherbrooke, where Aline Duquette is manager.
On her forearm Ms.
Duquette, 35, bears a fleur-de-lis _ the very symbol of Quebec independence.
``Very few young people take the fleur-de-lis nowadays,'' Ms.
Duquette said.
``They don't like to represent themselves that way anymore.''
QUEBEC (AP) _ Police fired tear gas at rowdy young people Wednesday after being pelted with rocks and bottles, the second year in a row force was needed to disperse unruly crowds on Quebec's provincial holiday.
Police said 35 people were arrested, many for minor incidents, during a concert and other celebrations to mark Quebec's Fete Nationale, which has been marred over the years by riots and other violent incidents.
Several shop windows were broken late Tuesday and early Wednesday, but the trouble-making was less serious than last year, when Quebec City's downtown businesses suffered millions of dollars of damage.
The holiday is celebrated mainly by Quebec's French-speaking nationalists _ those who support either outright independence from Canada or some form of increased autonomy.
During Wednesday's holiday parade in Montreal, the hard-line leader of a lobby group for the English-speaking minority was pelted with beer, water and a pie as he marched with colleagues at the tail end of the procession despite objections from parade organizers.
The heckling became so bad that police intervened, hustling Alliance Quebec leader William Johnson into a paddy wagon and driving him away.
``We had to stop his walk for his own safety,'' said Jean-Bruno Latour, a Montreal police spokesman.
``Negotiations following such a referendum would undoubtedly be difficult.
While negotiators would have to contemplate the possibility of secession, there would be no absolute entitlement to it and no assumption that an agreement reconciling all relevant rights and obligations would actually be reached.
``It is foreseeable that even negotiations carried out in conformity with the underlying constitutional principles could reach an impasse.
We need not speculate here as to what would then transpire,'' the opinion said.
Questioning the legality of Quebec's 30-year-fight for independence was a risky strategy for the federal government because any backlash against it in Quebec could make the separatist government of Premier Lucien Bouchard even more popular.
But federal officials, shaken by the near victory of the separatists in the October 1995 referendum on separation, had decided it was far more risky to just sit back and do nothing.
Since the separatist movement began in Quebec in the 1960s, the sentiment for breaking up Canada appeared to gain momentum.
In the first referendum on independence, in May 1980, the separatists gained 40 percent of the votes cast in Quebec, the only province where the referendum was held.
In the October 1995 referendum, Quebec's vote in favor of separation had increased to just over 49 percent.
Federal officials claim that separatists who have controlled the Quebec government for most of the last 20 years misled voters into thinking that separation would be quick and relatively easy.
According to published reports, separatist leaders planned to declare independence and gain recognition of the new country from France and the United States within days after the 1995 referendum if they had won, despite promises of a period of negotiation with the rest of Canada.
American officials have said it is unlikely the United States would have recognized an independent Quebec that seceded without the consent of the rest of Canada.
The Ottawa government decided in 1996 to join a suit filed by a federalist in Quebec asking the Supreme Court for an opinion on the constitutional legality of a unilateral Quebec secession.
Such opinions are called references and while not legally binding, they are important because of the moral and legal authority of the court.
The Supreme Court has issued 74 references since 1892.
The court limited its opinion strictly to the questions asked by the federal government and did not touch several other sensitive issues.
For example, it left up to politicians to decide whether ``a clear majority'' meant 51 percent of votes cast or some more rigorous standard.
The court also avoided the question of whether a Quebec that decides to leave Canada could then be partitioned because northern Indian tribes, like the Cree, have said firmly that they want to remain in Canada. &QL;
OTTAWA, October 14 (Xinhua) --Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chretien said people in the French-speaking province of Quebec are facing reality about the consequences of separation.
Efforts by provincial premiers to solve the unity crisis and his own government's work have opened up communication between Quebec and the rest of Canada, providing a reality check for Quebecers, Chretien said.
"This road to heaven just by voting independent has to be put in a realistic context, and it's what we've been able to do for the last two months," he was quoted as saying by reports today.
The premiers' unity initiative in Calgary and the "war of words" between the federal and Quebec government have helped clarify the issues, he said.
"Before, they (separatists in Quebec) were selling a dream, and now I guess that they have to look at the reality," he noted.
The Quebec issue has been dogging Canada in the past several decades.
People in the province voted to stay in Canada instead of separation in the October referendum two years ago.
The separatist government in Quebec said they would hold another referendum if they are re-elected in a provincial election, which is expected next year.
Quebec premier Lucien Bouchard will have a problem if he promises another referendum in the next election because "people in Quebec don't want any referendum," Chretien said.
"They're fed up.
They don't want us to discuss that any more.
He (Bouchard) is dividing the families, creating economic uncertainty," Chretien added.
QUEBEC _ Premier Lucien Bouchard and the separatist Parti Quebecois have retained control of Canada's largest province, possibly setting the stage for a bitter confrontation with the rest of Canada, and possibly another referendum on independence.
With nearly all 23,000 polling stations reporting late Monday night, the separatist party had 42.8 percent of the vote, compared with 43.6 percent for the anti-separatist Quebec Liberal Party and 12 percent for a third party, Democratic Action.
The separatists were expected to win 77 of the provincial assembly's 125 seats, the Liberals 46 and Democratic Action 1, with one seat unfilled because of a death during the campaign.
Bouchard appeared to have had more difficulty than expected defeating the provincial Liberal Party leader, Jean Charest, on whom many people in English Canada had pinned their hopes for an end to the French-speaking province's 30 years of threats to separate.
With results still trickling in, the separatists were projected to take roughly the same number of districts in the provincial assembly as in 1994, with roughly the same percentage of the overall vote as in the last election.
Bouchard had been counting on a gain of several seats to solidify his support.
The separatists fell short of the 46 percent they had said they needed to succeed in a third referendum to take Quebec out of Canada and form an independent nation of roughly seven million people on the northern border of the United States.
The separatists have lost two previous referendums, one decisively in 1980, the other narrowly in 1995.
Bouchard's support is strongest among French-speaking voters, who are more evenly spread throughout the province than English speakers, who are concentrated in and around the city of Montreal and who traditionally vote for the Liberals and against separation.
It was the third-party candidate, Mario Dumont, who seemed to have drawn votes from the separatists.
Bouchard told voters during the campaign that he would hold another referendum in the four to five years of his government if ``winning conditions'' existed.
While he never defined those conditions, it was widely believed that one of them was a level of popular support above 46 percent.
Voters sided with Bouchard even though the support for separation has declined.
Recent polls indicate that only 43 percent of Quebecers would vote yes in another referendum on independence, a drop of four percentage points during the course of the campaign.
``For the past few weeks, I have had the feeling that were it not for the issue of sovereignty, a greater number of English speaking Quebeckers would have supported our program,'' Bouchard said in a restrained victory speech before supporters here in Quebec.
He mentioned sovereighnty only once, repeating his pledge to create the ``winning conditions'' under which a referendum could be won.
But he also acknowledged that the lower than expected level of support for his party reflected a disastisfaction among voters that he could not ignore.
``I respect the signal you sent by choosing candidates who reflect their attachnment to Canada,'' he said.
``We have decided to stay the course no matter what political decisions the people of Quebec make for themselves''.
What appeared to be taking place, analysts said, is that Quebecers see this election as a vote on government, not on independence, so separatist emotions are in check.
But voters want Bouchard to keep alive the possibility of another referendum on separation as a way of increasing the province's leverage with Ottawa in upcoming discussions about changes in the shape of Canadian federalism.
Even without a referendum, Bouchard's re-election would increase tensions and uncertainty in Canada.
During the campaign, he said he would demand substantial changes in the Canadian federation, forcing Ottawa to give back more powers over social programs not just to Quebec but to all 10 provinces.
In one stroke, he silenced the critics in his own party who suspected his commitment to changing relations with the central government, and he undercut the position of Charest, who equated a vote for the Parti Quebecois with a vote for separation.
``We don't want, and Quebecers don't want, to be divided during the next four years,'' Charest said in a concession speech in his home district of Sherbrooke, where he narrowly regained his seat in the provincial assembly.
He said he would not resign, but would fight as leader of the opposition to bring Quebec together.
``The people of Quebec, like the people of all of Canada, want this country of ours to work and be a success whatever government it has,'' Charest said.
When Charest announced last spring that he would challenge Bouchard in the election, analysts gave the Parti Quebecois little chance of retaining power.
Many in English Canada believed that if Charest, a popular federal politician, could win and impose a moratorium on referendums for the next four to five years, he could end or severely impede the separatist movement, whose strength has been diluted by immigration and demographic change.
But Charest's campaign never caught on.
It is expected that there will now be calls for his resignation, and that of Prime Minister Jean Chretien, who is against changes to the Canadian federation.
(STORY CAN END HERE.
OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS).
nn The failure of Charest to win support in his home province was just one surprise among many in this election that seemed to settle very little except Bouchard's reputation as one of Quebec's most popular and adept political leaders.
``It's been the strangest election I have ever seen in my life,'' said Pierre Roy, 61, a retired businessman from Lac Beauport, near Quebec city.
``Bouchard's posters said `Have confidence,' but people are afraid about what's going to happen''.
Roy voted just after polls opened at 10 a.m. on a gray day marked with freezing rain and snow in many parts of the province.
While Quebec's future is still uncertain, the outcome of the election was predicted by public opinion polls weeks ago.
Unlike past developments on Quebec separation, which sent financial markets spiraling downward, the projected results appeared to have been discounted already.
The Canadian dollar actually strengthened slightly, closing at a value of 65 U.S. cents.
The Toronto Stock Exchange declined just under 2 percent on a day when most markets around the world were also down for reasons that had nothing to do with the election here.
The modern separatist movement began about 30 years ago and is based on deeply rooted feelings that Quebec has not been treated fairly by English speaking Canada.
Most popular among young voters, the movement seeks to preserve and strengthen Quebecois culture.
The most radical wing of the party pushes for outright independence, but more moderate members say they want to negotiate something less than a separate nation, perhaps an economic relationship with the rest of Canada that allows them to keep their Canadian passports and their Canadian currency but have control over language, culture and many other social considerations.
Separatists have often tried to portray the process of secession as straightforward and relatively painless.
But that does not take into account such issues as dividing the national debt, compensation for federal property and Quebec's place in international accords like the North American Free Trade Agreement.
The rest of Canada would not vote in a referendum, but would have to negotiate the terms of secession, a difficult process at best.
In addition, the Cree Indians who live in northern Quebec and roughly 700,000 English speakers in the Montreal area who want to stay in Canada would be likely to insist on the partition of the province.
The 33-day election campaign _ the shortest in Quebec history _ was marked by a frantic pace of speeches and rallies, and one debate on Nov.
17 that was seen by many viewers as a virtual tie between Bouchard and Charest.
Dumont, of the Democratic Action Party, also appeared in the debate, and his strong performance was believed to have hurt Charest.
Overall, the campaign generated little real emotion, despite expectations that it would be a clash of titans.
However, the results indicate that Quebec voters drew a sharp distinction between Bouchard's ability to govern and his party's commitment to holding a third referendum on separation.
Polls indicate that most Quebecers do not want to be put through another referendum, but that they believe the threat of separation is useful to bringing about changes in Canada.
``There were no people yelling slogans in the street or things like that,'' said Gilles Paquet, director of the Center on Governance at the University of Ottawa.
``Instead, what you saw today is the rational vote by a group that feels it can do better in the Canadian federation by electing a separatist government''.
What appears certain is that the results of Monday's election will set all of Canada on another painful round of introspection and soul-searching about the identity and nature of the country.
This period could be different, however, because Bouchard _ an experienced negotiator _ has introduced a new element that substantially changes the picture.
In one of the many major shifts in the positions that he took during the campaign, he hinted that before calling a referendum on independence, he would push Ottawa for a freer hand in spending on social issues, especially health.
Under Canada's national medical system, delivering health care is the responsibility of each of the 10 provinces.
But the federal government provides about 70 percent of the money that the provinces spend on health care and imposes many standards and restrictions on how the money can be spent.
Bouchard and the premiers of the other nine provinces signed an agreement at a meeting last summer to explore a new arrangement that would give the provinces more flexibility, including the chance to get money from Ottawa without participating in the federal system.
For Bouchard, it appears to be a strategy that cannot lose.
If Ottawa gives in to the demands, Bouchard can tell the people of Quebec that he wrested an important concession from Prime Minister Chretien, who has strongly opposed giving any more powers to the provinces.
If Ottawa refuses, Bouchard can say that he had tried to negotiate in good faith but was rejected.
That could represent one of the ``winning conditions'' that he said must be apparent before he calls for another referendum on separation.
What is uncertain, analysts say, is how much resentment would be generated by Ottawa's rebuff of the new federalism, and how that resentment would affect a vote on separation.
Since Bouchard signed the agreement with the other premiers last summer, little attention has been paid to the issue in Quebec.
But polls indicate that a majority of Quebecers want Bouchard to negotiate a new federal union.
By imposing the requirement of ``winning conditions'' on another referendum, and by raising the question of negotiating changes in Canadian federalism with Ottawa, Bouchard has left himself so many options that there is no way to know his exact plans.
MONCTON, New Brunswick (AP) --The land known as Acadia disappeared from maps nearly 300 years ago, when the French colonial settlement was lost to the British after years of war for what are now Canada's maritime provinces.
But Acadians and their culture are alive and well in French-speaking New Brunswick, perfectly happy to remain part of Canada and deeply distrustful of the independence aspirations of their fellow Francophones in nearby Quebec.
It's no coincidence that Canada chose to highlight the Acadians at a Francophone summit here this weekend --to show that not all French Canadians support Quebec's sovereignty and actually fear what an independent Quebec might mean for their own well-being.
``We can live together in harmony.
We're a good example to Quebec,'' said Roger Gaudet, a father of four who can trace his family history back to an original French settlement in Nova Scotia.
The 300,000 people of Acadian descent in Canada's Atlantic provinces --New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, Prince Edward Island and Newfoundland - worry most that an independent Quebec will only make it harder for them to preserve the French culture they have fought for 300 years to retain.
``The balance of power between Anglos and Francophones rests on a strong Quebec presence at the federal level,'' said Maurice Basque, director of Acadian studies at the University of Moncton, the largest Francophone university in the region.
``Without Quebec, the question will become: `Will Canada remain bilingual'''?
Quebec's sovereignty has been put on the back page for the time being, after voters rejected sovereignty in successive referendums in recent years.
Secessionists are vowing to try again in a few years.
Quebec legislator Francine Lalonde said the province will one day be its own country --with or without support from Acadians.
``The fact that Quebec will be a French country in association with Canada would be a plus for them in all sorts of ways,'' she said.
Quebec would continue to agitate for better French schools and services for the rest of French-speaking Canada, she said.
At the core of the Acadian argument against separation for Quebec is their own history and the event that defined them --the deportation of 10,000 Acadians from Nova Scotia by Britain beginning in 1755 for refusing to swear allegiance to the queen.
Many resettled in Louisiana, where they are now called Cajuns, but others returned to the provinces to reclaim the land of their ancestors and rekindle their French identity with Canada's blessing.
Today, Acadians make up about a third of the population of New Brunswick --too small a minority to challenge Ottawa for independence, but large enough to have successfully lobbied for public schools that teach entirely in French.
On Saturday, French President Jacques Chirac paid tribute to their courage, telling a crowd of several hundred people how honored he was to be among so many people loyal to France.
``I know the immense road your people have traveled since the tragic ordeals that have marked your identity for centuries,'' he said.
That recognition is enough to keep Acadians content with the status quo, said Acadian student Eric Larocque.
``Acadia was erased from the maps in the 1700s,'' he said.
``It doesn't exist but in the hearts of those who fought to save our language and culture.''
QUEBEC CITY _ Five years ago, Canada seemed a country about to rip itself apart.
In a 1995 referendum on independence, the restive province of Quebec came within a few thousand votes of secession, plunging Canada into its darkest political hour in decades.
And when Quebec's premier, Lucien Bouchard, vowed that within a few years Quebecers would vote to break away from the nine other provinces, no one could dismiss the vision.
The drive to create a French republic north of New England seemed all but irresistible.
Today, Quebec's separatist movement lies in tatters.
Not dead, certainly, but in disarray.
There seems little possibility Bouchard will risk humiliation by calling for another independence vote next year, as he had pledged.
But if the separatist cause suddenly bounces back _ and that also remains a possibility in this most unpredictable of provinces where French language, customs, and civil law reign supreme _ federalist folly will be mostly to blame.
Recent days have seen officials in Ottawa, Canada's capital, insistent on wagging the red Maple Leaf in the face of the Quebec bull.
And that's always risky.
Many observers warn that a new ``tough love'' campaign by Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chretien, a French Quebecer deeply opposed to separatism, represents a monumental political blunder _ one that risks giving Bouchard and his secessionist supporters the lift they need.
Even the usual Quebec-baiting voices of English Canada are cautioning Chretien against imposing a law that would spell out, for the first time, the conditions under which Quebec would be allowed to quit Canada's 133-year-old confederation.
``Why get tough with Quebec now''? asked the Toronto Star in an editorial.
``Bouchard's demoralized troops crave nothing more than a move that could rekindle nationalist passions''.
Chretien's efforts _ which have divided his Cabinet, with some ministers quietly warning that the current course makes no political sense _ have mostly succeeded in appalling Quebecers of all ideological stripes.
Only Bouchard's separatists seemed to relish the prospect of renewed confrontation, with the fiery premier railing against ``attacks on Quebec democracy''.
To Americans, Chretien's determination to impose strict ``rules of secession'' might seem sensible enough, a worthy precaution against the day when Quebec might rise again.
But French Quebecers, even ardent federalists, have bridled at any suggestion that the rest of Canada deserves a say over their destiny.
``Myself, I don't like separatists; I'm OK in Canada,'' said Denis Cote, a lawyer in the southwestern Quebec city of Hull.
``But I also think Canada has no damn business setting rules for Quebec.
Whether to stay or go should be our decision, and ours alone.
Every Quebecer feels that''.
Chretien's sudden determination to formalize the rules of divorce seem especially strange given that the Quebec-Canada marriage seems stronger than it has in decades.
In Montreal, Quebec's largest city and its economic engine _ and the only center with a large population of English speakers _ businesses and professionals are no longer fleeing in droves to Ontario to escape political uncertainty.
The language laws so despised by anglophones are being less rigorously applied, high-tech sectors are booming, and relations between French and English are noticeably friendlier and more relaxed.
Into this new bonhomie wades Chretien.
``Canada is my business, sir, and it's the future of Canada we are dealing with,'' the prime minister snapped during a recent news conference, vexed by reporters who questioned Ottawa's timing.
``This has to be done''.
Bouchard characterized Ottawa's hard line as a ``brutal and demented attack,'' and said his province does not need the permission of anyone except its voters to break away.
``After a `Yes' vote,. . . the doors will be wide open to a unilateral declaration of independence,'' he told reporters, barely concealing his glee that journalists were again asking about Quebec's future.
For Canada is getting tough on Quebec just as polls show the sovereignty movement going nowhere.
A survey released last month found 41 percent of Quebecers would vote ``Yes'' in a vote on separation.
That's a long way from the ``winning conditions'' that Bouchard has said must exist before he will call for another referendum.
The reason for the decline of support for separatism is difficult to pinpoint.
There has been no scandal, Bouchard remains a basically popular figure, and French Quebecers, according to polls, feel as distant from the rest of Canada as ever and still want some sort of new deal.
At the same time, familiarity with Bouchard and his governing Parti Quebecois has bred a certain cynicism, if not contempt.
Right now, Quebecers are steamed at hospital closures, slashed school spending, public service strikes, and an economy that is lagging behind that of other parts of Canada.
Quebec is the country's second most populous province, after Ontario.
``People are unhappy with the basic services that the government is supposed to provide them, whether it's health care, education, job training,'' said political analyst Jean-Marc Leger of the Quebec polling firm Groupe Leger &AMP; Leger.
``You can't be trying to talk sovereignty when people aren't happy with the basic services''.
In 1994, when the separatist Parti Quebecois regained control of Quebec's National Assembly, the provincial Legislature, after more than a decade on the political sidelines, Quebecers were bitter about Canada's refusal to grant the province special political status as a ``distinct society'' under an amended federal constitution.
Six years later, no one talks much about ``distinct society'' and the Parti Quebecois seems just another political party _ one that has done an adequate job of running Quebec, but not much more _ while Bouchard, although still respected and personally popular, increasingly seems just another Quebec premier, not the larger-than-life personification of heady nationalist dreams.
``When you govern, you hurt yourself,'' said Alain Gagnon, director of the Quebec studies program at Montreal's McGill University.
But some analysts say separatist fortunes could revive if Canada is perceived as trying to bully Quebec.
What Chretien is seeking is a federal law that would not forbid Quebec or any other province from seceding, but would lay down formal rules, including that the process take place ``in consultation'' with the rest of Canada and only after a vote in which a ``clear majority'' of Quebecers choose independence.
These seem risky demands, but federal hard-liners are adamant.
``We must stop being inhibited by the dual fear of backlash and self-fulfilling prophecy,'' said Stephane Dion, a Cabinet minister and point man for the tougher line on Quebec.
The federal government has refused to specify what it means by a ``clear majority,'' although the National Post newspaper, quoting unnamed Chretien government sources, reported recently that Ottawa would not accept Quebec's secession unless the separatists win 60 percent of the vote.
Bouchard calls this hypocrisy, noting that in 1949 Newfoundland was able to quit the United Kingdom and join Canada with a simple majority vote of 50 percent plus one vote.
The big difference was Canada and Britain wanted Newfoundland to switch allegiances.
``The rule has always been 50 percent plus one; that's democracy,'' Bouchard said.
``Making it any different means a federalist vote counts for more than a separatist vote.
That's the sort of rule Ottawa wants.''
OTTAWA, February 16 (Xinhua) --The Supreme Court of Canada began a landmark hearing Monday on whether the French-speaking province of Quebec has the right to secede unilaterally.
The week-long hearing is expected to let the court rule, months from now, on whether unilateral secession is legal under either domestic or international law, and if the two conflicts, which law prevails.
Canada's federal government initiated the court case 18 months ago in a bid to lay down legal rules for the political battle over Quebec separation.
The move is seen as a key part of Ottawa's strategy of challenging separatists arguments that Quebec has a right to separate regardless of the views of the rest of Canada.
The Quebec government is officially boycotting the case, saying that separation is a political issue rather than a legal issue and that the court should not hear the case.
Premier Jean Chretien's government is using a biased court to try to rob Quebecers of their democratic right to determine their own future, it argued.
"The last word belongs not to one man, not to one government, not to one text imposed from on high....
The last word belongs to Quebec democracy, to the Quebec people," declared Quebec Premier Lucien Bouchard.
SAINT-JEAN-SUR-RICHELIEU, Quebec (AP) _ It is a paradox that keeps all of Canada in limbo: Most Quebeckers aren't eager for another referendum on secession, yet they seem on the verge of re-electing a government committed to independence.
Barring a surprise in the campaign's final week, separatist Premier Lucien Bouchard and his Parti Quebecois are expected to win another term in provincial elections Nov.
30 and begin laying the groundwork for Quebec's third referendum on leaving Canada.
If Bouchard is to be stopped, the anti-separatist Quebec Liberal Party must win in places like Saint-Jean-sur-Richelieu, 25 miles (40 kilometers) southeast of Montreal.
It is a district with a history of voting on the winning side, and the separatists narrowly won here in 1994.
Even the local Liberal candidate is perplexed by the Quebec paradox.
``The polls show most people don't want any more referendums, and yet Bouchard is still popular,'' Gilles Dolbec said in an interview at his headquarters.
``We can we do''?
In 1994, the Liberals finished just barely behind the Parti Quebecois in the provincewide popular vote yet won only 47 of the 125 legislative seats, compared to 77 for the Parti Quebecois.
That gap exists because anti-separatist support is heavily concentrated in Montreal and a few other pockets with large numbers of English-speakers.
The Parti Quebecois has strong support in the majority of districts dominated by French-speakers, who make up about 82 percent of Quebec's 7 million population.
Saint-Jean is overwhelmingly French-speaking.
But, because of its bellwether reputation and the close 1994 result, it is one of 18 districts now held by the separatists that the Liberals are targeting in hopes of eking out a slim legislative majority.
Dolbec insists he is optimistic, but interviews with local journalists, politicians, college students and one of their political science teachers gave little indication of any enthusiasm for the Liberals' provincial leader, Jean Charest, who wants to replace Bouchard.
``Charest's not a bad person,'' said Pierre Bergeron, a student at the local junior college.
``He speaks well, but he doesn't develop the issues''.
Bergeron's classmate, Chantal Girard, said Charest _ a native Quebecker who spent more than a decade in federal politics _ is ``too Canadian''.
That can be a damaging image in a province where voters expect their politicians to be Quebeckers first.
Both students agreed with political science professor Michel Barrette that many young Quebeckers are apathetic about the campaign.
But they predicted Bouchard would win the bulk of the votes cast by young people, even though Charest, at 40, is 19 years younger than the popular premier.
Charest has stressed two themes in his campaign _ that the threat of another secession referendum is undermining Quebec's economy and that Bouchard's budget-cutting to erase a deficit has ravaged the public health care system.
Yet at the Saint-Jean hospital, the director of medical services said his staff accepted the need for spending cuts and has adjusted to reforms meant to shorten patients' stays.
``Mr. Charest is ringing empty bells,'' said Dr.
Stephen Morgan.
``He says what Bouchard has done is awful, but he doesn't say what he'd do instead''.
Morgan, a native French-speaker despite his Anglo-sounding name, said he hadn't decided whether to vote for the Parti Quebecois or a long-shot third party headed by 28-year-old Mario Dumont.
His decision, he said, will be based on prospects for providing effective government, not on the issue of separation.
``I would vote `No' in a referendum'' on secession, he said.
``But I could vote for Bouchard''.
That meshes with the line coming from the local Parti Quebecois candidate, Roger Paquin.
``We're still a separatist party.
What we want to do is clear,'' he said.
``But we're also a provincial government, and we have to work for the people now.
This election is about a quality government for Quebec''.
Opinion polls indicate two-thirds of Quebeckers don't want a referendum during the next government's term in power.
Yet Bouchard appears to be attracting support from some of those voters with his somewhat ambiguous promise to hold a referendum only when ``winning conditions'' exist.
Commentators suggest this enables Bouchard to win backing both from hard-line separatists and from francophones who don't want independence but like having a feisty pro-Quebec government that is willing to battle federal officials.
``It's not clear that Quebeckers really want to get rid of ambiguity,'' wrote Lysiane Gagnon, a columnist for the Montreal daily La Presse.
``Most francophones have grown used to living with sovereignty's sword of Damocles hanging over their heads.
... It's been talked about for 30 years and it never happens, so what's the problem?''
OTTAWA, January 12 (Xinhua) --Lucien Bouchard is expected to become Parti Quebecois leader and Quebec premier at the end of this month, reviving a crusade for Quebec independence from Canada.
Bouchard secured his leadership in Quebec on the midnight Thursday when be became the only candidate to seek the posts.
He will be proclaimed the leader of Party Quebecois at a special party meeting in Montreal on January 27 and will probably be sworn in as premier two days later.
He will resign as leader of Bloc Quebecois, the official opposition party in the Federal Parliament.
Bouchard decided to take over the job last November from Parti Quebecois and Quebec Premier Jacquese Parizeau who announced his resignation after the October-30 referendum on Quebec independence was defeated.
He took over the leadership from Parizeau in the referendum campaign and he was credited with his role in the final campaign which brought separatists to a near victory from the hopeless mood.
Bouchard's moving into the Quebec politics will keep the independence movement in the province alive.
Bouchard has promised to tackle the province's deficit crisis and to create a climate for economic growth.
Opinions show that most quebeckers want the provincial government to focus its attention to the economy rather than independence after the referendum.
Quebec has serious financial problems with one of the biggest debt and tax burdens in Canada.
In an editorial, the Montreal daily Gazette today urges Bouchard to devote his energy to governing and tackling the "very serious social, economic and fiscal problems" facing Quebeckers.
But Bouchard never hid his goal of Quebec independence.
He told quebeckers on the referendum night, last November that next referendum could come sooner than they think.
News reports said earlier that Bouchard will consider a fall election in Quebec.
The election, assuming that he would win, would position him to hold another referendum on independence next year.
MONTREAL (AP) _ It was a judgment worthy of Solomon.
Canada's Supreme Court managed to rule on the question of Quebec secession without infuriating leaders on either side of a bitter ideological divide.
In its unanimous opinion Thursday, the court stated clearly _ as the federal government had hoped _ that Quebec had no right to secede from Canada unilaterally.
The ruling was widely considered the most important ever by Canada's high court.
But instead of the expected anger from separatists, there was satisfaction over another part of the court's declaration: that federal officials would be obligated to negotiate if a clear majority of Quebeckers voted for secession in a fair referendum.
``We've always said that negotiations would follow a vote for secession,'' said Jacques Brassard, a Cabinet minister in Quebec's pro-independence government.
``Now what the court has said is that these negotiations will be obligatory''.
Hard-line anti-separatists also were pleased, because for the first time, the high court said the separatists' longstanding claim that Quebec could decide for itself whether to secede has no legal basis.
``If I were a dancing man, I'd be dancing in the street,'' said William Johnson, president of a Montreal-based group called Alliance Quebec that promotes the rights of the province's English-speaking minority.
``Secessionists have always said that they alone could impose the question (in a referendum), interpret the results as they like and then impose all the conditions of the secession,'' Johnson said.
``It has always been false''.
Secession by Quebec _ where more than 80 percent of the 7 million residents are French-speaking _ would deprive Canada of a quarter of its population and split the four Atlantic provinces from the rest of the country.
The ruling is likely to play a pivotal role in Quebec's upcoming provincial election.
Premier Lucien Bouchard, the separatists' charismatic leader, is expected to hold the vote either late this year or next spring, and he plans to call another referendum on secession if he wins re-election.
The latest polls show Bouchard's Parti Quebecois running neck-and-neck with the anti-separatist Liberal Party.
The leader of the Quebec Liberals, Jean Charest, said the election would offer a clear choice to voters in the mostly French-speaking province.
``Do we want a government that's going to hold another referendum...
or do we want to get down to the business of building Quebec''? he asked.
Montrealers espoused virtually every possible viewpoint after the ruling.
Some were pleased by the balanced nature of the decision; others complained that the court was intruding on a matter that concerned only Quebeckers.
``It isn't up to the courts,'' said Martin Pare, 26.
``When people want to be free, they make that choice themselves''.
Clyde Jennings, a 29-year-old graphic artist, said the ruling sends a message to the Quebec government that secession would involve bargaining and possible compromise.
``It takes the pressure off the separation issue and puts the emphasis on people's rights,'' he said.
``It sends a strong signal that Canada is one country''.
The high court decided to leave some of the thorniest issues to the politicians.
It did not specify what victory margin would constitute a ``clear majority'' in a secession referendum, and it did not grapple with the possibility that negotiations over secession might reach an impasse .
FLORENCE, Ky.
_ Since dedicating himself to creationism 20 years ago when he was a disillusioned science teacher in Australia, Ken Ham has found that progress generally can be slow, but hardly as slow as his evolutionist adversaries would have the world believe.
After moving to America five years ago, Ham, a dedicated Christian fundamentalist with an Abe Lincoln gaze to his musings about the origin of life, now directs a $5-million-a-year enterprise and claims to have 110 ``creation clubs'' in schools across the country.
He expects more as he spreads the literal word according to Genesis _ that creation was a divine accomplishment in six days _ and tries to debunk the teaching of evolution.
This would seem an uphill struggle, but Ham takes comfort that the phones and Web site of his nonprofit organization, Answers in Genesis Inc.
, are still busy with the stir created by creationism's biggest victory to date _ the Kansas Board of Education's decision last August to yield to growing pressure and delete virtually any mention of evolution from the state's science curriculum.
This was followed last month by the decision of state education officials here in Kentucky to eliminate the word ``evolution'' but not the scientific theory of evolution from the school curriculum and to substitute the phrase ``change over time''.
In Oklahoma, officials recently ordered that textbooks must bear a disclaimer about the certainty of evolution.
On the other hand, New Mexico's Board of Education voted last month to bar creationism and overwhelmingly endorse evolution in the science curriculum.
``This whole battle is hotting up,'' Ham summarized amid some glaring, gaping full-sized dinosaur models scattered about his headquarters like an oddly dissenting chorus on the phylogenetic scale.
Ham uses the mystery about the sudden disappearance of dinosaurs from creation as an argument against evolution.
He is planning to build a creationist museum north of here near Cincinnati, full of naturalist displays presenting ``creation science'' arguments that creation was accomplished 6,000 years ago.
Under the theory of evolution, rooted in a myriad of fossil, anatomic and genetic evidence, the scientific consensus is that life began on earth around 3.9 billion years ago, with humans and other species evolving from a common ancestor.
Ham has his own staff of scientists arguing to the contrary in heavily foot-noted monographs challenging the reliability of carbon-dating and other underpinnings of modern science.
``I see a culture war hotting up in America between Christian morality and relative morality, which is really the difference between a creation-based philosophy and an evolution-based one,'' said Ham, who argues that if the word ``day'' in Genesis' account of creation is allowed to be taken metaphorically to encompass eons and to blur divinity's role, then the Bible is made fallible and morality reduced to human whim.
Whether or not America is ready for such a culture war of words, Ham is.
His group claims 140,000 on its mailing list and more than 3,000 visitors a day to its Web site at www.answersingenesis.org.
H says the organization is growing as political leaders are more tempted to tinker with accepted notions about evolution.
Supported by donations and fees on a wide array of handsomely produced recordings and publications, Answers in Genesis holds seminars across the country, offering counterarguments to evolution.
It offers not outright Christian fundamentalism, but ``a supplement to the church,'' in Ham's view.
Teachers who sponsor the creation clubs must sign a commitment to ``the inerrant word of God''.
As a nonprofit group, his organization does not lobby government.
But it presents information to anyone who asks, and Ham happily claims that some Kansas officials involved in the curriculum decision are quite familiar with his publications.
``I'm very encouraged,'' said Ham, the director of one of the nation's two dominant creationist groups.
The other is the Institute for Creation Research in San Diego, where Ham once worked.
He decided to strike out on his own into what he says is a growing field of intellectual challenge, but what his critics say is a fundamentalist protest niche far more lucrative than enlightening.
``We're having a rash of statewide problems,'' said Eugenie Scott, executive director of the National Center for Science Education, the main grass-roots science group active against creationism, with 4,000 members.
While creation clubs are entitled to free speech, Ms.
Scott said, they prepare adherents with flurries of classroom challenges that ``tend to discourage the teaching of evolution''.
In reaction to creationist assaults, the National Science Teachers Association, with 53,000 teachers, has begun holding information sessions at its state conventions this fall to prepare teachers to lead their communities in defending evolution as vital to a proper education.
Ken Rosenbaum, a Kentucky science teacher, rankles at ``change over time'' as the state's official new euphemism for evolution.
He expects his state Science Teachers Association, of which he is executive director, will soon come out firmly behind evolution.
``Put a nail outside and it will rust,'' Rosenbaum commented, teacherlike.
``That's change over time.
But is it evolution''?
Ham is only further encouraged by the evolutionists' rallying to their cause as his own speaking engagements grow.
``I was trained in a Christian home by a father always prepared to defend his faith in a logical way,'' he said.
``I saw him do that over and over against liberal theology,'' said Ham, confidently patting the synthetic hide of a large dinosaur being prepared for the future museum of creationism.
The information card of the extinct creature offered the standard natural history pedigree, with an added notation: ``Created Day Six.''
Someone made the pen she writes with.
Someone made the keyboard she types on.
All complex systems are designed by someone, so it follows that life, the most complex system of all, has a designer, too, said Johnson, of Prairie Village, Kan.
``No one's saying who that intelligent designer is,'' she said.
To Johnson, evolution simply makes no sense.
She rejects the evidence most scientists say supports the theory that all living things share common ancestors.
She firmly believes in the biblical account of creation.
Early this year she mounted a campaign to turn the Kansas science community on its ear.
Judging from the agitation in the state over evolution, there is evidence she has succeeded: - In the beginning, the Kansas Board of Education and the state education commissioner appointed a 27-member committee of science teachers and professors to write new science standards for public schools.
The committee's version described the theory of evolution as a ``unifying concept'' for all science disciplines.
It drew objections from those who do not believe in evolution.
Late last winter, Johnson pulled together a loosely knit group of creationists from Kansas and Missouri who drafted an alternate version of the standards.
The alternate draft, presented to the state board, defined both evolution and creation in its glossary.
It also defined the battle that would occupy the state board for months.
- Johnson visited the Kansas board again and again, urging members to reject the committee's science standards in favor of her group's standards.
- She also formed the National Committee for Excellence in Science Education, which helps people in other states who want to question evolution.
The group intends to offer the alternate science standards written by Johnson and others to people in other states.
Steve Abrams, a conservative Kansas Board of Education member from Arkansas City, Kan.
, presented the alternate standards Johnson helped write.
``She was very dedicated and wants to see good science in Kansas,'' said Abrams, a veterinarian.
Val DeFever, a moderate board member from Independence, Kan.
, said Johnson was determined to sway board members to her point of view.
``I just explained to her we weren't on the same wavelength,'' said DeFever, who supported the standards written by the science teachers.
``We were both committed to our viewpoints, and it really would be a waste of time''.
Johnson says she wanted scientists to explain why, as she sees it, evolution is immune from question and why other explanations for the origins of life cannot be considered in science classes.
``I admire her dedication,'' said Ken Ham, executive director of the creationist organization Answers in Genesis, based in Kentucky.
``I admire her trying to do these things''.
Johnson's critics say that, under the guise of science, she is trying to inject into the public schools her religious belief that God created the universe.
John van Keppel of Leawood, Kan.
, an evolution supporter, says Johnson does not understand science well enough to dispute the facts of evolution.
The evidence against evolution that Johnson and other creationists say is being censored by mainstream science is a cut-and-paste job, said Charlotte McDonald, the Blue Valley School District's science coordinator.
``She is not presenting the whole scientific information,'' McDonald said.
``If you're going to take things out of context, you can refute anything you want to refute''.
&LR; brk:Fliers at malls Johnson, a 43-year-old mother of four, shares her beliefs with most people she meets.
She begins many conversations with creation naysayers by asking, ``What do you know about evolution to be true''?
In 1995 she and her brother asked the Shawnee Mission School District to use Of Pandas and People, a science textbook that puts forth intelligent design _ the idea that an intelligent being created Earth and everything in it.
District officials said they considered the text but rejected it.
Johnson and her husband began visiting shopping malls on weekends to place homemade creationist fliers on cars.
The fliers contained passages such as this: ``The theory of evolution is just a theory, yet our public school's texts do not mention the significant amount of scientific evidence against it.
Why the censorship''?
For Johnson and her husband, Eric, 37, the truth about how the universe came to be is readily available and has been for centuries.
``You have to believe the Bible is true,'' said Eric Johnson, a stockbroker.
``If it's not true, it's just a paperweight''.
Celtie Johnson said she was not completely against evolution being taught.
She said she just wanted teachers to feel comfortable presenting the pros and cons of Charles Darwin's theory.
Many feel pressured to teach evolution as a fact, she said.
She has been told, subtly and not, to sit down and shut up.
She has not.
``I feel confident that most humans have common sense, that they can critically think,'' Johnson said.
``I don't want them to be plagued with believing evolution, because it's not true''.
&LR; brk:Macro vs.
micro Some on the 10-member Kansas Board of Education agreed with Johnson, and in August the board approved science standards that contained references to microevolution, or adaptation, but no mention of macroevolution, or change from one species to another.
The revised version no longer lists evolution as one of science's unifying concepts.
The revised standards also omit many references to the age of Earth.
There is no longer any mention of the big-bang theory _ the idea that the universe was born in an explosion of matter and radiation between 12 billion and 20 billion years ago.
Those deletions are significant to ``young Earth creationists'' such as Johnson who believe that the Earth was created in six 24-hour days sometime in the last 7,000 years.
Creationists say they have evidence that supports this belief: - It takes about 300 to 1,000 years to form an inch of topsoil, but the worldwide average depth is about 7 to 8 inches, which means the Earth is only a few thousand years old, creationists say.
Evolutionists respond that that argument does not take erosion into account.
- The eruption of Mount St.
Helens in 1980 produced 25 feet of finely layered sediment and gouged canyons in one afternoon, which shows that millions of years are not required to form rock layers.
This lends credence to the global flood and other catastrophic events in the Bible, creationists say.
Evolutionists say erosion happens at variable rates all over the world.
Catastrophes explain some geologic formations but not all.
- Earth's magnetic field has been decaying rapidly, which creationists say points to an age younger than 10,000 years.
WASHINGTON (AP) --The Supreme Court refused to let a public school district require that the teaching of evolution be accompanied by a disclaimer mentioning ''the biblical version of creation'' and other teachings on life's origin.
The justices, by a 6-3 vote Monday, let stand rulings that struck down a Louisiana school board's disclaimer policy as a violation of the constitutionally required separation of government and religion.
Monday's action was not a precedent-setting decision but only a denial of review.
Chief Justice William H.
Rehnquist and Justices Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas voted to hear arguments in the case.
The Tangipahoa Parish school board in 1994 voted to require teachers to tell students about to study the theory of evolution that is ''presented to inform students of the scientific concept and not intended to influence or dissuade the biblical version of creation or any other concept''.
The disclaimer drafted by the school board also said: ''It is the basic right and privilege of each student to form his-her own opinion or maintain beliefs taught by parents on this very important matter.
... Students are urged to exercise critical thinking and gather all information possible and closely examine each alternative toward forming an opinion''.
Three parents of students sued in federal court to challenge the policy, and a federal judge blocked its enforcement.
The judge said the disclaimer was unconstitutional because it had a religious purpose.
A three-judge panel of the 5th U.S.
Circuit Court of Appeals agreed that the disclaimer had to be struck down but cited a different reason --it had the effect of promoting religion.
The panel did not rule out the possibility that a school board could require some type of disclaimer stating that evolution was not the only accepted explanation of the origin of life.
But it said the Tangipahoa Parish disclaimer ''under the facts and circumstances of this case...
is not sufficiently neutral'' to be constitutionally permissible.
In the appeal acted on Monday, lawyers for the school board argued that ''the mere mention of the biblical version of creation by way of illustration does not present a significant risk of perceived endorsement of Bible-based religion''.
The appeal said reasonable high school or elementary students would not interpret the disclaimer as a pro-religion message.
''The central message of the disclaimer resolution is that there are no outsiders or insiders, no one who is favored or disfavored, on the issue of life's origin but persons of all viewpoints are full members in the school community''.
Lawyers for those who challenged the disclaimer disagreed.
''By disclaiming only evolution --the one element of the school curriculum that generates religious controversy -- the school board has violated both the constitutional mandate of neutrality toward religion and its obligation to provide its students with secular educations free from religious indoctrination or partisanship,'' they said.
They noted that the disclaimer was drafted shortly after the school board voted 5-4 to reject a proposal to teach ''creation-science'' in the district's schools.
Creation-science teaches that Earth and most life forms came into existence suddenly about 6,000 years ago.
Critics have attacked it as a disguise for a literal translation of the Book of Genesis.
Evolution, first propounded by Charles Darwin, states that Earth is billions of years old, and that life forms developed gradually several million years ago.
The Supreme Court in 1987 barred states from requiring the teaching of creationism in public schools where evolution is taught, calling such a Louisiana law a thinly veiled attempt to promote religion.
The teaching of evolution has been controversial since the famous 1925 ''monkey law'' trial in which teacher John Scopes was convicted and fined $100 for teaching evolution when Tennessee law made it a crime to teach anything but the Biblical version of creation.
Scopes' conviction later was overturned by the Tennessee Supreme Court on a procedural matter, and never reached the nation's highest court.
The case is Tangipahoa Parish Board of Education vs.
Freiler, 99-1625.
Writing for the court's three dissenters Monday, Scalia criticized the court for standing by while an appeals court ''bars a school district from even suggesting to students that other theories besides evolution --including but not limited to, the biblical theory of creation -- are worthy of their consideration''.
----- On the Net: For the appeals court ruling: http://www.uscourts.gov/links.html and click on 5th Circuit .
WASHINGTON (AP) --Nineteen states got D's or F's in a report that evaluated how public schools teach evolution, raising a new issue in a continuing dispute between science and religion.
The report graded 49 states and the District of Columbia and gave the highest rankings to California, Connecticut, Indiana, New Jersey, North Carolina and Rhode Island.
Kansas, whose standards were described as ''disgraceful,'' got the lowest grade.
The report was commissioned by the Thomas B.
Fordham Foundation and released Tuesday at the American Association for the Advancement of Science national headquarters.
Following the six top-ranked states, four states got numerical grades in the 90s and were also given A's in the report.
Fourteen states were graded at B, seven got C, six were given D's and 13 flunked.
Iowa was not included because it has no statewide education standards, leaving that up to each local district.
Linda Holloway, former chairman of the Kansas State Board of Education, said the report was deceptive and ''very unfair''.
''Clearly they have an ax to grind about evolution,'' she said in a telephone interview.
Kansas last year rekindled the issue of teaching evolution in public schools when the state board of education, led by Holloway, approved science teaching standards that minimized the importance of evolution and omitted the big-bang theory of the origin of the universe.
Other states have considered similar curriculum changes and some state legislatures have proposed laws that would forbid completely the teaching of evolution in public schools.
Evolution, a theory developed by Charles Darwin and others, holds that the Earth is billions of years old and that all creatures, including humans, evolved from simpler forms through a process of natural selection.
Related to biological evolution is the concept that the universe began with a ''big bang'' and that only later were the sun and the planets formed.
Teaching of evolution has been opposed by those who believe that the universe, the Earth and its creatures were created abruptly by God.
Some proponents of divine creation have organized a concept, called creationism, that they proposed be taught along with evolution.
In 1987, the Supreme Court barred states from requiring the teaching of creationism.
Now some of the same proponents support other concepts, such as ''abrupt appearance'' or ''intelligent design,'' that are linked to divine creation.
Lawrence S.
Lerner, who compiled the report, said the conflict ''is not really about science, but about religion and politics''.
He calls creationism ''a pseudoscientific rival to evolution that the courts have repeatedly held to be thinly veiled religion''.
Lerner, a former professor at California State University, Long Beach, said Kansas got such a poor grade because its guidelines forbid teaching anything about the age of the Earth or the universe.
''There is not a reference to the age of the universe because it changes all the time,'' explained Holloway.
''Within a month after we adopted the standards, I heard three different ages of the Earth.
That is kind of ludicrous to get them (teachers) to stick to one age when it changes all the time''.
Lerner called the Kansas science education standards ''a disgraceful paean to antiscience''.
Holloway, however, said the report was part of ''a campaign of deception'' and that all districts in Kansas are still teaching evolution.
''All we did was allow local groups to decide how they wanted to teach evolution,'' she said.
''That is a reasonable thing to do''.
Warren Nord, a member of a panel assembled by AAAS to comment on the report, spoke in favor of education standards that would include religious concepts of creation along with concepts of evolution.
But Nord, director of the Program on Humanities and Human Values at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, said the report failed to evaluate the completeness of science education.
''A good science education should not limit itself to what scientists think, but should also explore the cultural context in which scientific claims are made,'' said Nord, noting that the report ''doesn't address that''.
----- On the Net: Fordham Foundation: http://www.edexcellence.net AAAS: http://www.aaas.org/
KANSAS _ In the days after the Kansas Board of Education voted to play down evolution in the state's science standards, chairwoman Linda Holloway joked that evolution supporters were acting as if the sky was falling.
More than two weeks have passed since the Aug.
11 decision, and the sky is still where it's supposed to be, but there has been fallout on many fronts: The American Civil Liberties Union of Kansas and Western Missouri sent a letter to the superintendents of each of the state's 304 school districts.
It reviewed recent U.S.
Supreme Court decisions that outlawed teaching biblical creationism in science classes.
State Rep.
David Adkins of Leawood said he would sponsor legislation requiring high school students entering state universities to have studied evolution, the theory that living things have common ancestors and change over time.
Two national science organizations _ the National Academy of Sciences and the American Chemical Society _ condemned the board's action as a setback for science education in Kansas.
Evolution proponents formed a group, Kansas Citizens for Science, to support teachers and districts that want to teach the theory.
The publisher of a new textbook on Kansas history has decided to drop a chapter on the state's prehistory.
The chapter focused on the prehistoric inland sea and 150 million-year-old fossils found in western Kansas.
After hearing national reports about the new science standards, the board of the foundation publishing the book thought some Kansans might take issue with those topics.
``If we talk about (things that old), then it's beyond a creation date that most religions use,'' said Jim Bean, director of the Grace Dangberg Foundation in Carson City, Nev.
, which promotes the study of history by young people.
Kansas State University Professor Gary Conrad said he's having difficulty recruiting candidates for two openings within the biology department.
Last week, Conrad said, the president of an out-of-state research institution told him she would discourage her students from considering Kansas for employment because their children would be subjected to a public school education that might not include evolution.
School board members in Pratt, Kan.
, west of Wichita, listened to a presentation on a science textbook that espouses the theory of intelligent design _ the idea that a superior being designed the universe and everything in it.
During the media frenzy after the vote of the 10-member board, confusion abounded about the science standards' purpose.
The standards are guidelines for school districts to use as they determine what students should learn.
The document written by a 27-member committee of science educators listed evolution as a major concept, but earlier this month six board members _ five conservatives and one moderate _ voted to remove the emphasis.
The tests used as part of the state's accreditation program are based on the standards, and observers say most districts teach to the test.
New science tests to be given in the 2000-2001 school year will not include questions on macro-evolution, the idea that different species can share common ancestors.
That's fine with Mary Douglass Brown of Wichita, one of the board members who favored de-emphasizing evolution.
The board's intent was not to force creationism or any other theory on the origins of life into science classrooms, but to allow school districts to decide for themselves, Brown said.
She said she checked with officials of the Wichita School District before the vote and was told students would continue to learn about evolution.
That's the district's prerogative, Brown said.
``People don't seem to want to trust their local people to make this decision, and that's all we've done,'' Brown said.
``If Yoder (Kan).
wants creationism and their people want it, that's their business.
And I'm not going to stand in the way of it''.
Brown dismisses the idea that the board's decision could harm Kansas students.
But it's a real worry for Bill Wagnon, a board member from Topeka who supported the standards written by the science teachers.
Wagnon said he feared Kansas would lose its position as a leader and innovator in education.
The K-State professor's troubles attracting faculty members are just a start, Wagnon said.
``Reputations are hard to earn and easy to shatter,'' Wagnon said.
The science standards have yet to reach school districts.
The board's attorney still is ironing out copyright questions over parts of the standards based on materials from the National Academy of Sciences.
The standards written by the teachers committee relied heavily on the academy's National Science Education Standards, but the changed version might not meet with the academy's approval.
The standards will be sent to school districts as soon as those questions are answered, said Kathy Toelkes, the board's spokeswoman.
Dick Kurtenbach, executive director of the ACLU of Kansas and Western Missouri, said his organization had recruited a Kansas City law firm to determine what legal recourse the ACLU has.
He disputed Brown's claim of a return to local control.
``Why have standards at all''?
Kurtenbach said.
``Why select one aspect of it but pass on pages and pages and pages of other mandated issues?
If it was about local control, the state board would eliminate all standards and go out of business.''
BOSTON (AP) --Fearing a growing assault on the teaching of Darwin's theories, a group of textbook authors has launched a campaign in defense of evolution education.
A joint statement, to be released today at the National Science Teachers Association, a convention of 20,000 science teachers, comes as some public school districts consider softening their evolution curricula.
``As scientists and teachers, we find it unacceptable that school districts considering our books for adoption would be encouraged to choose one book over another based on the perception that teachers should avoid the topic of evolution,'' the statement by 23 authors reads.
Backed by the California-based National Center for Science Education, the signers include Bruce Alberts, president of the National Academy of Sciences and an author of a cell biology book.
Evolution education continues to raise passions in American schools more than 70 years after teacher John Scopes was convicted of violating a Tennessee law against teaching it.
And the debate rages a decade after the Supreme Court ruled that public schools can't teach that God created the universe.
Over the last five years, the National Center for Science Education has logged scores of complaints from parents and educators worried about attacks on evolution education.
Some school districts have pushed for textbooks that are considered ``soft'' on evolution teaching, said Molleen Matsumura of the NCSE.
Others have advocated disclaimer stickers on texts, such as one approved by the Alabama Board of Education in 1995.
The Alabama label explains that evolution is a theory and that text statements about the origins of life should be considered as such.
Last month, the Melvindale-Northern Allen Park School Board in Michigan decided to supply some of its libraries with books that raise questions about the validity of evolutionary theory.
And in Texas last year, school districts across the state were urged to adopt textbooks that didn't ``harp on'' evolution, Matsumura said.
A Christian publisher's textbook, ``Of Pandas and People,'' has grown in popularity.
It, and others like it, subscribe to the theory that the world and its living creatures came about by ``intelligent design''.
The evolution scientists say that's just code for creationism.
The evolutionists are ``vastly overreacting to what we're trying to accomplish,'' said Raymond G.
Bohlin, who has a doctorate in molecular biology and heads the Probe Ministries, based in Richardson, Texas.
What he and others want, he said, is for evolution to be fairly represented and juxtaposed with other theories of life.
But there are no other theories, the scientists who signed the statement say.
Teaching biology without evolution is like teaching physics while ignoring gravity, they say.
``It's academically and intellectually dishonest to teach biology any other way,'' said Eric Strauss, author of a popular introductory biology textbook and a biology professor at Boston College.
WACO, Texas _ They are the new breed of creationists.
Atomic creationists, you might say.
And their official harboring at Baylor University has caused many in the faculty to go nuclear.
The launching of a center to promote ``theistic science'' or ``intelligent design'' is proving to be one of the biggest controversies of the Robert Sloan presidency.
If not the biggest controversy, possibly it is the most emblematic.
The issue is the Michael Polanyi Center.
Created supposedly to build a bridge between science and religion, it shares a hangar with Baylor's Institute for Faith and Learning.
Problem: Baylor didn't consult anyone in its science departments.
To much of the faculty, this is no bridge.
It's a detour.
The chairman of the faculty senate, Robert Baird, calls Polanyi ``one of the most divisive issues'' in his 32 years at Baylor and bemoans that a center focused on what it calls the ``growing dialogue between science and religion'' was created without a word sought from Baylor's scientists.
While much of the concern is over process, such as the science faculty's perceived snubbing, the overriding issue is substance _ what Polanyi is about.
What it's about is not an alliance with science but the refuting of it, or at least refuting the science of evolution and its Darwinist underpinnings.
That was clear within the first few words of a conference called ``The Nature of Nature'' hosted by Baylor and the center last week.
University of Texas philosophy Professor Robert Koons told the audience that with the whole of evidence examined, scientists (evolutionists) ``have no authority to dictate to us''.
Dialogue, anyone?
``Nature is comprehensible only'' if an outside force _ God _ has set in motion all the inner complexity, he said.
Koons among others, including Polanyi director William Dembski, adheres to the ``intelligent design'' theory _ the new creationism.
Essentially it grants to science certain facts: that the world is billions of years old rather than a few thousand, that evolution is a fact as it pertains to plants and animals, right up to the doorstep of man.
However, the essence of intelligent design is that man is in God's image, as the Bible says.
As Christians, Baylor science faculty members who so vehemently denounce Polanyi may not disagree with that bottom line.
They just see the ``intelligent design'' crowd as seeking to put a tourniquet on inquiry.
Baylor associate psychology Professor Charles Weaver derides it as the ``God card'' characterized by the bumper sticker meant to annoy any scientist: ``God says it; I believe it; that settles it''.
Whatever God might say, science is the process of studying that which can be examined and tested empirically.
In a feisty and somewhat quixotic way, the intelligent design crowd is like a kickboxer challenging a microscope to a fight.
The microscope is not there to fight.
It is there to examine.
That doesn't mean that the scientists won't fight.
Baylor associate biology Professor Richard Duhrkopf, a bitter critic of Polanyi, said the center's quest is to ``change the philosophy of science''.
More ominously, it is advocated by creationists as a wedge to get religion into science class in public schools, as reported recently by ``CNN Newsstand''.
``Darwin is dead, Darwinism is getting sicker by the day,'' wrote creationist Hal Ostrander in a recent commentary in SBC Life extolling the work of Dembski and Co.
Ostrander gushes about the potential of intelligent design to transform science class in public schools.
Critics in the Baylor faculty see the Polanyi Center as undermining the university's reputation in the sciences.
If Baylor thinks Polanyi is worth risking its reputation, maybe that empirical stuff isn't what it wants to be known for.
John Young is opinion page editor of the Waco Tribune-Herald.
E-mail: jyoung(at)wacotrib.com.
Story Filed By Cox Newspapers For Use By Clients of the New York Times News Service
TOPEKA, Kan.
_ Sitting at their students' desks two days before the start of the new school year, four high school biology teachers here were hashing over the vote of the Kansas Board of Education, earlier this month, to delete virtually any mention of evolution from the state's recommended science curriculum and its standardized tests.
The teachers' reaction was as swift as it was unanimous: They would continue to teach science as they have been, with the support of their superintendent.
``They'll get evolution here,'' said Elaine Pardee, who teaches at Washburn Rural High, where the science classroom walls are lined with various animal skeletons that, by their very appearance, testify to the evolutionary theory of a common ancestor among mammals.
``We're not going to cheat our kids''.
About 200 miles away in Pratt, a small town west of Wichita, the local school board president, Willa Beth Mills, had a very different reaction to the state board's action.
She applauded it, and said she hoped that it would lead to elements of creationism _ or at least a heavy dose of skepticism about the theory of evolution _ being injected into her district's schools.
``I don't think it's relegated to Sunday school,'' Mrs.
Mills said.
``If you present the material to students with critical thinking, and they come to you with a paper supporting creationism, or arguing against evolutionary theory from a creationist point of view, you should accept that''.
These are emotionally volatile and exceptionally confusing days for the teachers, principals and parents of Kansas' public school children.
Two weeks after the board's vote, which was widely interpreted as establishing an important national beachhead for creationists, the theater of battle has shifted to the state's 304 public school districts.
Because the adoption of standards in science or any other subject cannot be dictated under state law, it will be up to each district to decide whether to follow the lead of the state board, which periodically issues guidelines suggesting what should be taught in the state's classrooms.
What the state board can control is the content of its standardized tests.
Beginning in the 2000-2001 school year, the state tests in 7th- and 10th-grade science will not ask students questions about the theories that multiple species have evolved from a common ancestor and that the universe originated in an explosion, or big bang _ two ideas that have come under sharp attack from those who have found more persuasive evidence of the world's origins in religion.
Questions about ``micro-evolution,'' defined in the state guidelines as changes in an organism's ``structure, function or behavior,'' will remain.
At issue for Kansans is nothing less than reconciling two central explanations of life: the Darwinian theory that man and monkey gradually branched off from the same family tree millions of years ago as they adjusted to a changing environment, a contention heavily rooted in scientific evidence, and the creationist belief that a divine being has been pulling the biological levers of the universe, including the origin of man as described in the Bible.
The debate concerns more than what public school students should learn about each point of view, more than a decade after the Supreme Court said states could not compel the teaching of creationism.
For science teachers, the state board's characterization of evolution as a theory shrouded in doubt _ no matter the supporting testimony of fossils and genetic codes _ has raised worries about whether other theories at the heart of science, like those concerning atoms or even gravity, will come under attack next.
(BEGIN OPTIONAL TRIM) ``If you take away evolution because it's a theory, you can't teach science,'' said Steve Angel, a chemistry professor who is the president of the Auburn-Washburn school board in Topeka and a member of the committee of experts whose standards were rewritten by the state board.
``All of science is theory''.
Gov. Bill Graves, a moderate Republican, has been among the most vocal critics of the state board, whose 10 members are elected and are outside of his control.
He argues that the six-member majority that rewrote the standards in just a few hours, ripping out whole pages of a document that had been drafted over nearly two years by a committee of 27 scientists and science teachers, did so to make a rhetorical splash at the behest of the conservative wing of the state Republican Party.
``There are 304 locally elected school boards who have the option to tell the state board to go jump in the lake,'' said Mike Matson, a spokesman for the governor.
``The governor is confident the overwhelming number will''.
(END OPTIONAL TRIM) At the urging of a group of parents, the school board in Pratt, a town of about 7,000, arranged a presentation earlier this month from a local wildlife biologist about a controversial book titled ``Of Pandas and People: The Central Question of Biological Origins''.
The book _ first printed in 1989 by Haughton Publishing of Dallas and since sold to public schools in more than a dozen states, including Pennsylvania, Louisiana and Texas _ suggests that ``intelligent design,'' as engineered by an ``intelligent agent,'' may be a more compelling explanation than biological evolution for the wide variety found in nature.
While the book stops well short of identifying God as the designer, as creationists might, critics, including those affiliated with the National Association of Biology Teachers, have condemned the book as little more than an artfully worded end-run around the constitutional separation of church and state in the classroom.
But to Chris Mammoliti, a biologist with the state Department of Wildlife and Parks who presented the book to the Pratt board, ``Of Pandas and People'' and its theory of intelligent design provides the perfect antidote to those teachers who might be tempted to teach evolution as an undisputed fact.
``I see the theory as saying, `It is legitimate to have, as part of the tool kit for science education, the option to say that the things we see in nature may be designed or could have been designed,''' he said.
``It doesn't speculate or presuppose that there is a creator or miracles involved''.
Mrs. Mills, the board president in Pratt, said the book is now under consideration for inclusion as a supplement to the district science curriculum, which was already being rewritten at the time of the state board vote.
nn Administrators in Pratt said that Mrs.
Mills' position on the standards has not prompted anyone to tell district officials they would pull their children out of the school system.
In Auburn-Washburn, one of five school districts in Topeka, the board president, Steve Angel, and the superintendent, Howard Shuler, have pledged that there will be no change in the district science standards in response to the state board vote.
Shuler said that only one parent of the district's 5,000 students had written to criticize the district stance, and that none had threatened to pull children out of district schools).
Ninth-grade biology students at Washburn Rural will be introduced to Darwin and the theory of evolution over three to five days in the spring semester, after they have gone through rites of high school biology like dissecting a rat and a sheep's heart.
The textbook used in the ninth grade, ``Biology: Visualizing Life,'' published by Holt, Rinehart and Winston of Austin, Texas, explains that ``monkeys, apes and humans are examples of primates'' and argues that ``primates most likely evolved from small, insect-eating rodentlike mammals that lived about 60 millions years ago''.
Ms. Pardee, who has taught biology at Washburn Rural for nine years, tells her students that the theory of evolution ``is the most currently acceptable scientific explanation that we have,'' but adds that her students ``don't have to believe it''.
What she insists is that her students ``know what the facts of the theory are''.
Though they might be able to pass the new state science test without such knowledge, she says, the material is covered in the standardized science test for the district and the advanced placement test in biology.
When the inevitable question from a student arises about creationism, usually couched in a biblical reference, Kevin Bordewick, another biology teacher at Washburn Rural, said he cuts off such discussions, believing they are better suited to a humanities class or the home.
``It's between them, their parents and whatever God they believe in, if any,'' Bordewick said.
Though Bordewick and his colleagues at Washburn said they would never introduce their personal beliefs into the classroom, other teachers said drawing such a thick line was nearly impossible.
Joyce Depenbusch, who teaches 7th- and 8th-grade science in Skyline, in Pratt County, says she believes that ``evolution and creation don't have to be mutually exclusive,'' and that ``God's plan of creation can include evolution''.
While Mrs.
Depenbusch says she does not ``present the science of creationism in my classroom,'' she says she was not opposed to telling her students about her beliefs, as long as she prefaced her comments ``very heavily'' with a warning that the ideas were her own.
``Evolution is a theory,'' she said.
``We can present several different theories to help them think.
Let them do some thinking with the help of their families.
Then let them make up their own minds.''
SANTA FE, N.M.
_ Bucking recent changes in Kansas and other states that allow public schools to teach alternative views of human development, the New Mexico Board of Education voted overwhelmingly on Friday to limit the statewide science curriculum to the teaching of evolution.
The vote effectively made New Mexico the first state in recent years to take a firm stand against the teaching of creationism, which generally recognizes the Bible as the ultimate authority on how the world was formed.
Creationism holds that a divine being created humans and other species a mere 10,000 years ago, while evolutionists say scientific evidence shows that life began almost 4 billion years ago with simple organisms, from which humans and all other forms of life evolved.
Until now, teachers had been required to give equal weight to alternative theories _ which in practical terms meant creationism _ in their science classroom discussions.
``This gives teachers the political cover they need to teach evolution,'' said Marshall Berman, the board member who led a three-year campaign to change the policy.
The board voted 14-1 in favor of the change, which will affect the 100,000 children who attend New Mexico's 725 public schools.
The lone dissenter, Van W.
Witt, objected by arguing that students should be allowed to consider all sides of the debate and then ``make up their minds with their parents''.
In the brief debate among board members that preceded the vote, Berman refuted that position, insisting that creationism _ or ``intelligent design,'' as some evolution opponents call it _ is not a comparable theory for teaching in public schools.
``If the assumption is there are two sides, I question the assumption,'' Berman told Witt.
``The sense is of creationism as a scientific theory, that it exists as a reliable principle.
But it is not based on science''.
While the often emotional debate between proponents of creationism and evolution is not new, it was rekindled this summer when the Kansas Board of Education voted to delete almost any mention of evolution from the state's science curriculum.
In a similar action, the Education Department of Kentucky deleted the word ``evolution'' from the state science curriculum, replacing it with the phrase ``change over time,'' which some state teachers interpreted as an attack on widely-accepted scientific principles.
Other states, including Alabama and Nebraska, have made other changes that allow for discussion of theories that challenge evolution.
Creationists hailed each of those changes as major victories during a time when the teaching of evolution has enjoyed pre-eminence in most public school districts as a result of a 1987 Supreme Court decision that said states could not compel the teaching of creationism in public schools.
In their battles to chip away at the dominance of evolution as the unchallenged explanation of life, creationists have run headstrong into teachers and scientists who have effectively lobbied their state and local school boards, as they have here in New Mexico, to keep evolution at the forefront of classroom discourse.
Flora M.
Sanchez, the president of the New Mexico Board, said that since the Kansas decision she had received ``a lot of negative input'' from scientists and teachers around the state who were uncomfortable with performance standards that required teachers to entertain alternative theories to evolution.
Many of the board members felt uneasy with comparisons with Kansas, she said, adding, ``So we decided we had to clarify our standards''.
(STORY CAN END HERE.
OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS) Some of that pressure was evident Friday, during the public comment period that preceded the vote.
Eight proponents of the changes, most of them scientists and teachers, urged the board to vote in favor, while three people appeared to raise objections.
Bruce Miller, a high school biology teacher who testified before the board, said that he feels more comfortable with a regulation that narrows teaching to theories based on science.
``I need it spelled out that I don't have to address a string of silly alternative theories,'' he said.
``With 175 class room days, I don't have time for that''.
Another proponent of the change, David E.
Thomas, editor of the Newsletter of the New Mexicans for Science and Reason, said that if public schools allowed unscientific theories to be taught, ``pretty soon we'll have Holocaust deniers insisting there were no gas chambers''.
Cindy Chapman, who teaches first- and second-graders, said the new regulations would even help teachers of the youngest children in public schools whose early knowledge of human development is often shaped by religion and is learned at home.
She said she was recently approached by a little boy in class who told her why dinosaurs no longer roam the earth.
``He said, `Because there was no room in the ark,''' Ms.
Chapman said.
``I don't think he made that up himself''.
Among those protesting the new standards was Paul Gammill, a retired engineer and the father of three children who attended Albuquerque public schools.
He echoed the concerns of many creationists, telling the board that evolution is ``arbitrary and dogmatic''.
He insisted that his view has nothing to do with religion, but in an interview before his testimony he said a belief in God is not compatible with acceptance of evolution.
While it appeared that most board members had their minds made up before the vote, they listened with rapt attention to Tom Manaster, a retired cab driver from Chicago now living in New Mexico who urged the board to reject any teaching standards beyond what can be proven.
``I wouldn't be here if it weren't for good science,'' he said.
``Five years ago I survived a brain tumor.
Those doctors had all kinds of religions and beliefs, but they also had some pretty good science''. &QL;
Just as historical debates are revisited from time to time, so is the seemingly age-old debate about how the origin of man should be taught in the classroom.
On the one hand, groups like the National Academy of Sciences say that evolution should be taught with no mention of the biblical version of creation.
On the other hand, some church leaders say they want creation science offered as an alternative to the cut-and-dried theory of natural selection, which holds that species emerge over time.
The National Academy of Sciences published a book this year reiterating its 15-year-old position that the theory of evolution _ and not religious beliefs _ should be taught in every public school biology classroom.
Yet this time, the academy provided examples of how a person can believe in God and still believe in evolution _ a position many religious scholars would agree with.
``I don't think in any way that science is at odds with the Bible,'' said Jeb Airey, pastor of the North Arlington Christian Center in Arlington, Texas.
``I think that science is a complement to the Bible''.
Further, there is a false belief by some that religious people can't be scientific, said Scott Youngblood, president of the Arlington Ministerial Association and pastor of St.
Barnabas United Methodist Church in Arlington.
``There's this misinterpretation that somehow you can't be smart and religious at the same time, and I think that not to be the case,'' Youngblood said.
``Every theory has holes; many scientists acknowledge the mystery in it to be God''.
Considered the nation's pre-eminent scientific organization, the National Academy of Sciences was chartered by Congress in 1863 to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters.
The academy's new book, designed for ministers, parents and anyone interested in the issue of teaching evolution, follows last year's release of another National Academy of Sciences publication specifically designed to show teachers how to explain evolution and how to answer questions about creation _ complete with mock conversations.
``It's kind of a one-two punch,'' said Eugenie Scott, executive director of the El Cerrito, Calif.-based National Center for Science Education, who sat on the steering committee for both publications.
Several local biology teachers say the issue has never been contentious in their classrooms.
Jim Davis has taught biology at Lamar High School in Arlington for 10 years and has spent about 24 years in the classroom.
He describes himself as a Christian and believes the Bible is a work written by men but inspired by God.
``I do believe in Jesus Christ,'' Davis said.
``The first thing I think about at the beginning of the day is to try to pattern my life after Christ''.
Yet, he said he can't deny the scientific evidence from carbon dating and fossils that humans existed several million years ago.
Davis said the discussions about evolution have come up often in his classroom through the years.
He occasionally finds himself answering the question: ``If man really came from apes, then why are apes still here''?
He said he patiently explains that scientists have found evidence not that humans came from apes but that apes and humans evolved from a common ancestor.
Surprisingly, he said, the students rarely get upset.
``I try to always present the information and let the kids make their own choice.
If they ask my opinion, I tell them,'' he said.
``As a science teacher and a Christian, I never belittle anyone or make them feel bad when we talk about evolution.
It's too important of a topic''.
Youngblood, however, said it's not that easy for many Christian teachers.
``The majority of our teachers are Christians,'' he said.
``They are following as best they can the guidelines they've been given not to teach religion.
For most of our teachers, that puts them from time to time in a bit of a conflict''.
_ ``It is the first week of classes at Central High School.
As the bell rings for third period, Karen, the newest teacher on the faculty, walks into the teachers' lounge.
She greets her colleagues, Barbara and Doug...
``By the way, Barbara, thanks for letting me see your syllabus for Bio I.
But I wanted to ask you about teaching evolution.
I didn't see it there''.
``You didn't see it on my syllabus because it's not a separate topic,'' Barbara said.
``I use evolution as a theme to tie the course together, so it comes into just about every unit.
You'll see a section called `History of Life' on the second page, and there's a section called `Natural Selection'.
But I don't treat evolution separately because it is related to almost every other topic in biology''.
``Wait a minute, Barbara,'' Doug says.
``Is that good advice for a new teacher?
I mean, evolution is a controversial subject, and a lot of us don't get around to teaching it.
I don't.
You do, but you're braver than most of us''.
``It's not a matter of bravery, Doug,'' Barbara replies.
``It's a matter of what needs to be taught if we want students to understand biology.
Teaching biology without evolution would be like teaching civics and never mentioning the United States Constitution ''''...
_ Excerpt from Teaching About Evolution and the Nature of Science.
National Academy of Sciences, 1998 _ (Visit the Star-Telegram's online services on the World Wide Web: www.star-telegram.com) nn
It's not quite the Scopes trial, but a raucous Republican state school board primary election in Kansas this month sent a signal about the place of science in 21st century America, and about how quickly the relationship between science and religion is changing.
In the election, voters defeated those candidates who last year supported removing the mention of evolution from the state science curriculum.
The word is expected to be restored after the November school board elections, a significant setback for creationists.
Evolution won out in Kansas not because people in this conservative, deeply religious state have grown agnostic.
Rather, they believe that science, more than ever, is critical to their children's future and the future of their state.
These dot-com times demand scientific knowledge and technical expertise, parents believe, and to lack it is to be left behind.
``There is a realization that we can't have an informed generation if they don't know basic science,'' said Robert Russell, a physicist and minister who is executive director of the Center for Theology and the Natural Sciences, which is affiliated with the Graduate Theological Union in Berkeley, California.
``It's their right, it's their inheritance.
Instead of seeing science as an enemy, you see it as a tool''.
The idea that Kansas would fall behind academically and economically was one of the principal arguments used by evolution proponents in Kansas.
Scientists and school board candidates _ even the governor _ said Kansas would seem embarrassingly backward if the new science standards stayed in place.
Lt. Gov.
Gary Sherrer said that businesses considering relocating to Kansas had been ``scared off'' out of concern that their employees' children would not be getting a good education and that the work force would not be competitive.
Sue Gamble, who won the primary in a district that includes affluent Kansas City suburbs, said during the campaign that she worried the new science standards could ``put students at a disadvantage on a national level'' and that ``students from out of state won't want to come here and study because they feel the standards won't be up to snuff''.
Pro-evolution forces also made overtures of inclusiveness to those who wanted to embrace religion and scientific reasoning.
Steve Case, a biologist at the University of Kansas and a leader of the drive to restore evolution to the curriculum, said that he and others brought in speakers like Dr.
Kenneth R.
Miller, a Brown University microbiologist and author of ``Finding Darwin's God: A Scientist's Search for Common Ground between God and Evolution''.
In his talks, Miller quoted St.
Thomas Aquinas, ``who says it's wrong for the religious community to misdescribe how nature works because what it will do is drive people away from religion,'' Case said.
``That helped clarify for a person in the middle how they could hold a religious view and not have that conflict with science''.
Accommodation, national polls suggest, is smart politics.
A 1999 Gallup poll found that 68 percent of American adults favored teaching both creationism and evolution in public schools.
Another poll, released this year by the People for the American Way Foundation, found that while 83 percent supported teaching evolution in schools, almost half of the respondents said that evolution ``is far from being proven scientifically''.
And 68 percent said it was possible to believe in evolution and that God created humans and guided their development.
``Maybe voters in Kansas didn't see it as an either-or thing,'' said Dr.
James F.
Moore, a professor of theology at Valparaiso University, who also directs the science and religion workshop at the Zygon Center for Science and Religion in Chicago.
``I really do sense that there's a growing trend among common folk to search for how the two areas that are so important to our life can work compatibly together''.
Moore sees that desire in the way that major hospitals and research projects like the human genome project now have ethics panels with religious representatives.
And ``in religious communities there is an awareness of how important scientific developments have become,'' Moore said.
``If we don't know what's going on, and we don't know how to interpret what's going on, how can any religious voices really play a role?
We will be left behind and not know what we need to know''.
That is not to say that the battle between evolution and creationism is over.
But the language in which it is fought, especially on the religious right, has changed.
Proponents of ``intelligent design,'' for example, assert that the earth is too complex to have been created by random processes.
Only some sort of an intelligence could have done it, they say, and they seek to debunk evolution by, for instance, pointing to gaps in the fossil record.
Such arguments, which scientists find specious, have been well received in some quarters.
Alabama and Oklahoma, for example, have included disclaimers in biology textbooks that raise questions about the certainty of evolution.
Kentucky recently eliminated the word ``evolution'' from its curriculum, substituting the phrase ``change over time''.
&QL; &QL; &UR; BC-KANSAS-CREATIONISM-REVIEW-2NDTAKE-NYT &LR; &QL; &UR; UNDATED: over time''.
&LR; &QL; &QL; Several other states are debating similar moves.
In Arizona and Ohio, bills have been introduced that would require teachers to present evidence for and against evolution, and Case said he has been contacted by people in Minnesota looking to fend off such a challenge.
And dozens of local school boards across the country are considering teaching some form of creationism.
Phillip E.
Johnson, a law professor at the University of California who supports intelligent design, said the Kansas episode would only stiffen the spines of evolution opponents to show ``that the neo-Darwinian sensibility is intellectually vulnerable''.
Yet, as science continues its inexorable progress, some believe that religion must, ultimately, embrace it.
``I don't think the church has been good at this,'' said the Rev.
Christopher Carlisle, an Episcopal priest who co-directs the God and Science Project at Amherst College.
``I think it has been self-preservationist, and I think the result of that has been we have been losing people and we have less and less to preserve.
An awful lot of the future of the church depends upon the church's welcoming these questions and these conversations''.
Dick Teresi, a science writer and co-leader of the God and Science Project, says that the fanaticism of creationists has made scientists so defensive that they have lost the critical perspective that is the basis of scientific inquiry.
``Now, you have to believe in evolution as if it were a religion,'' Teresi said.
``You see evolution being taught in a very teleological way _ this organism is built this way because.
This would never happen in physics, where the whole thing is to poke holes in other people's theories.
I would teach evolution with all its flaws, and emphasize the randomness.
We have to live with the idea that humans are random creatures.''
TOPEKA, Kan.
_ Struggling to avoid a deadlock, the 10 Kansas Board of Education members on Wednesday left hanging the question of whether to accept science standards designating evolution as the foundation of biology.
The standards, written by a state committee of science teachers and university professors, would determine what Kansas schoolchildren learn and are tested on.
They list evolution as one of five unifying concepts linking all science disciplines.
A competing set of standards presented by conservative board member Steve Abrams on Wednesday would remove the emphasis on evolution and insert ``the idea that the design and complexity of the design of the cosmos requires an intelligent designer''.
Those standards were written by ``various citizens,'' including members of a local creation-science group.
For two hours the board questioned the state committee and Abrams.
Some board members questioned why the committee based its work on standards written by a national science group.
Others asked Abrams, of Arkansas City, why he did not include the names of the people who wrote his proposal; the only names on the document were those of the science committee members.
As the discussion ended, board Chairwoman Linda Holloway of Shawnee said she was unwilling to put the matter to a vote when it was clear that board opinions were split.
``The decision rests with this board, and this is where the wrestling will have to come,'' Holloway said.
``The responsibility ultimately rests with these 10 members''.
According to the board's schedule, the board is to vote on the standards in June.
But Holloway said she was sure the board would not be ready to vote that soon.
The debate stems from a 1997 vote by the board for new standards in all subject areas.
The science standards committee, appointed in part by board members, has met 12 times since last June, co-chairman Loren Lutes of Elkhart told the board.
Lutes, superintendent of the Elkhart School District, told the board that the committee used guidelines from the National Academy of Sciences to frame the Kansas standards.
Lutes said those guidelines ``represent, in our opinion, a consensus of what is right for science education''.
Before arriving at the state board for discussion, the proposed Kansas standards had been through eight public hearings and were reviewed by the Council for Basic Education, based in Washington.
The fourth draft reflected the group's criticisms and public comments, Lutes said.
Lutes said his committee had reviewed the Abrams version and found a fundamental difference in how the two documents defined science.
Board member Scott Hill of Abilene, a conservative, said the differences were unclear.
Committee member Brad Williamson said the difference lay in how the two sets of standards treated scientific theory.
The committee's version says a theory such as evolution paints a big picture of how the natural world works.
Abrams' proposal casts theory as conjecture, placing applied science above understanding how things work, said Williamson, an Olathe East High School science teacher.
``Science tries to figure out what's out there,'' Williamson said.
``That's the point I'd like to share with my kids, and that's taken away from me in (Abrams') document''.
Abrams, a veterinarian, said later in the discussion that he pushed for alternate standards because the committee's work did not reflect his view of good science.
He said he did not find in the document his understanding that all scientific theories must be observable, measurable, testable and falsifiable.
To him, evolution is none of these things.
Abrams denied the accusations of several speakers who on Tuesday called his proposal an attempt to push religion into the schools.
He said the proposal's intent in mentioning intelligent design was to acknowledge that more than one theory existed on life's origins.
Some members suggested that Abrams and the science committee work out a compromise.
Lutes, the committee co-chairman, said he was unwilling to integrate the Abrams proposal into the committee's standards.
If the board asks him to, he will resign, and so will many committee members, Lutes said.
The committee meets Monday in Salina to discuss its next step, Lutes said after the board meeting.
``As long as the board continues to let us do our work, we're going to do it,'' Lutes said.
``When the board takes over our job, we're going to give it to them''.
The board members said repeatedly they wanted consensus on the standards.
In the last two years the board has deadlocked along conservative-moderate lines over state tests, math standards and some federal programs.
The 5-5 split continued after November's elections, but the board agreed in January to find common ground.
In March, for example, members unanimously approved new math standards almost a year after they appeared before the previous board.
As the discussion Wednesday ended, Holloway spoke.
She said one aspect of the Abrams proposal that touched her was a statement that ``the cause of science or education (cannot) be served well by censoring, ridiculing or in any other way discouraging students from proposing and defending alternate theories''.
In the board's open forum Tuesday, some speakers accused Holloway, a Christian conservative, of attempting to impose her religious beliefs on public education.
``My faith was personally attacked yesterday,'' Holloway said, her voice breaking.
``I don't want that for any child in the state of Kansas.
``We see what ridicule can lead to in Littleton.
I don't want any child or staff member to be ridiculed because they have a faith that might be different from a prevailing theory.''
SHAWNEE, Kan.
_ When it comes to teaching evolution, Al Frisby won't compromise.
Frisby, a biology teacher at Shawnee Mission Northwest High School, starts each school year by explaining to parents what their children will learn: the habits, physical characteristics and life processes of plants and animals, and evolution, to explain how those processes developed.
``Without evolution, the building will fall down,'' Frisby said.
``It's the cornerstone of biology''.
Frisby is adamant that the Christian belief in a universe created by God has no place in his science classroom.
But one of Frisby's brightest students, 14-year-old Heather Ellsworth, sees evolutionary theory as so much hogwash.
She believes God alone created the earth and everything on it, just as the Bible says.
Some teachers take a low-key approach to teaching evolution, the scientific theory that living things share common ancestors but change over time.
Others, such as Frisby, emphasize it.
At the forefront of this discussion are Kansas' new science curriculum standards.
The version written by a state committee would declare evolution one of five concepts that unite all scientific disciplines.
A competing proposal presented by a conservative state school board member would remove the emphasis on evolutionary theory and question its validity.
The 10-member Kansas Board of Education, split evenly down conservative-moderate lines, is struggling to find consensus between the two ideas.
The courts and many in the science community, including Frisby, say those ideas are mutually exclusive inside science classrooms.
On Heather's first day in freshman biology, Frisby told his class that evolution holds the underpinnings for the life sciences.
After class, Heather approached him.
``I said, `Mr.
Frisby, I don't agree with evolution,' '' Heather remembered.
``He said, `Let's agree to disagree'.
'' And they've been disagreeing agreeably all year long.
Frisby hasn't changed his lessons to accommodate Heather's beliefs, although last fall he did attend a creation science workshop at the invitation of Heather's father.
Heather hasn't changed her mind, either, but she answers test questions on evolution by the book.
``We can live with that,'' said the Rev.
Phil Ellsworth, Heather's father and pastor of the evangelical Grace Christian Fellowship Church in Shawnee.
Could this truce be the kind of middle ground that Kansas Board of Education members are looking for?
Larry Scharmann thinks it might be.
As an education professor at Kansas State University, Scharmann tells future teachers they should not present theories such as evolution in ways that polarize their students.
Teachers needs to realize that students, like everyone else, value the beliefs they've learned from their families and churches.
``You're not trying to beat that out of them,'' Scharmann said.
Understanding doesn't mandate belief, Scharmann said.
Science teachers taking a realistic view of their students know this, he said.
``(Students) don't have to believe these theories, just know how to use them,'' Scharmann said.
``Evolution, like all good scientific theories, is an excellent problem-solving tool''.
The science standards that have revived the debate determine what Kansas students will learn and be tested on.
The standards, written by a state committee appointed in part by the state board, are based on guidelines from national science associations.
Evolution takes a leading role, and that's what led to the alternate proposal put forth by conservative board member Steve Abrams of Arkansas City.
Abrams' version would change the definition of science, eliminate all but one reference to evolution and add to the glossary a definition of creation as ``the idea that the design and complexity of the design of the cosmos requires an intelligent designer''.
Abrams has said the intent of his proposal is partly to allow school districts the freedom to decide how to handle teaching evolution.
That's similar to the way the Missouri curriculum standards work, said Orlo Shroyer, Missouri's assistant commissioner of education.
The controversy over evolution is nothing new for members of the Shawnee Mission Northwest science department.
Several years ago, the school's science test scores dipped because teachers were avoiding evolutionary theory, said Robert Siemens, the department chairman.
So the department beefed up its approach to evolution, Siemens said.
Last year, a few students and parents objected to a mural in the science hall depicting the evolution of humans from an apelike creature to modern man.
The mural remains, but the teachers wonder for how long.
And this year, the science standards are causing much discussion, at least among the science faculty.
The teachers know that some students don't believe evolution occurred.
Although most of Siemens' students realize the theory has a place in science classrooms, there always are a few who ask to be excused from learning about evolution, saying it goes against their religious belief in creation.
``A lot of them have been taught that they have to believe one or the other,'' Siemens said.
``And that's so sad''.
Siemens and Frisby always end their units on evolution by assigning students a paper on the origin of life.
The assignment gives students the chance to defend their beliefs, and some always choose to write on creation.
Frisby said that this year he has more students _ about 40 percent _ who don't accept evolution.
One parent has offered nm &LR; bate Frisby on the subject.
Heather Ellsworth said she understands that Frisby has to teac(AIY &QC; 1ution as the theory accepted by the majority of scientists.
Her father, Phil Ellsworth, said he's confident his daughter won't be swayed from her basic religious belief that God created the world.
Both Ellsworths believe there's room in the science classroom for more than one theory on the origin of life.
But Frisby adamantly disagrees.
``I feel like I'm putting my face up against a brick wall,'' Frisby said.
``If there's no evolution, I can't teach.
I can't compromise.''
PRATT, Kan.
_ Despite controversy and confusion swirling around her like dust devils in the wheat fields, Lu Bitter, a science teacher at Pratt High School, is clear about one thing: She will continue teaching the theory of evolution, as she has for 27 years, until she is ordered to stop.
And if she was a betting woman, she would wager that across the state, science and biology teachers will do the same, despite the recent decision by the Kansas State Board of Education to remove any mention of evolution from the state's new science curriculum.
Anything beyond that is, well, evolving.
Two weeks after the state board threw science education in this state into turmoil and reignited a perennial debate about whether evolutionary theory or creationism has a place in American classrooms, teachers and administrators in 304 school districts across Kansas still are trying to determine what effect the decision will have on them.
Rather than banning outright the teaching of evolution and anything related to it, such as the origin of the universe, the board, in what was described as a compromise, opted to leave it it up to local school districts to decide if those subjects would be included in their curricula.
It also ruled that no questions on evolution will be included in standardized tests.
In some school districts, this is a problem to face down the road when they get around to revising their science curricula.
But in some, such as Pratt, which was in the process of doing so when the state board acted, it has become a volatile, potentially divisive issue.
``I honestly can't tell you what is going to happen here, mostly because we haven't seen anything from the state yet,'' said Bitter.
``When we get the standards from the state, we might have some other theories mentioned more, but I don't think we are going to have to teach creationism''.
Maybe not.
But the teachers in Pratt may have to teach something closely akin to it.
Ten days before the state board's controversial vote, a small group of parents in Pratt appeared before the local school board and requested that a book titled ``Of Pandas and People: The Central Question of Biological Origins'' be included in the list of science textbooks to be considered for the proposed new curriculum.
On one level, it was a legitimate request by parents seeking input into what books should be used in the classrooms of their schools.
But coming, as it did, so close to the state board's decision, the request raised questions about whether Pratt, a town of about 7,000, will become one of the newest battlegrounds in a war that began nearly three-quarters of a century ago when a teacher in Tennessee by the name of John Scopes was convicted of the crime of teaching evolution.
That conviction was overturned and eventually led to a ruling by the U.S.
Supreme Court that teaching creationism violated the constitutional separation of church and state.
``Of Pandas and People'' does not posit God as the creator.
It is ostensibly a textbook that promotes the theory of ``intelligent design,'' or the idea that life is so complex and miraculous that it could not have come about without the guidance of a master architect, or some intelligent force.
But it also is widely believed to be the textbook of the creationists who have tried, unsuccessfully, to introduce it to schoolbook lists in Idaho, Alabama and Texas and who have sold it to local school districts in several states.
The book is considered by the National Association of Biology Teachers, among others, to be little more than creation theory minus the ``creator''.
Chris Mammoliti, a biologist with the state Department of Wildlife and Parks who presented ``Of Pandas and People'' to the Pratt school board early this month, insisted that there is no hidden agenda in his attempts to get the book on the textbook lists.
He also insisted that the timing of his presentation was coincidental to the action by the state board.
``We recommended `Of Pandas and People' be used as a supplemental textbook because it provides another interpretation of the same scientific evidence,'' Mammoliti said.
``We made it clear that we did not want evolution taken out of the curriculum and that we thought it important that evolution continue to be taught.
We just think it should be taught in a less dogmatic way''.
There are seven people on the Pratt school district board.
Two, including board President Willa Beth Mills, who reportedly hopes to see elements of creationism included in the district's science curriculum, supported including ``Of Pandas and People''.
The other five have not revealed their thinking.
Which, inevitably, in a small town like Pratt, has led to much speculation.
``We simply don't know what they (the board) are going to do,'' said Bitter, whose husband was a former president of the board.
Andy Koenigs, the assistant superintendent for Pratt schools, sought to downplay any suggestion that the creationism vs.
evolution issue was causing divisions within the community.
However he acknowledged that the state board's actions two weeks ago had compromised the district's efforts to write a new science curriculum.
``Our curriculum is on pause until we get the standards from the state,'' Koenigs said.
``I know that one side of this issue (those opposed to the teaching of evolution) is claiming a big victory, but my prediction is that many of the school districts will continue to teach evolution''.
Koenigs also downplayed the importance of the theoretical creationism/evolution debate to the practicalities of teaching, pointing out that in Pratt evolution takes up no more than three days out of the school year.
``It's much ado about nothing,'' he said.
Before retiring, Janell Mead spent 20 years teaching evolution at Pratt High School without community objection.
In fact, she said, the only real controversy to hit the campus before the last few weeks was when ``secular humanism'' was debated.
And even that was dropped before it became a divisive issue.
Mead, who studied genetics and evolution in college, said she was concerned that those in the community, like herself, who argued against creationism would be branded as un-Christian.
``We are not anti-Christian,'' she said.
``I teach Sunday school.
I know I'm not an atheist.
In fact I don't think I know any atheists.
I would like to think that they (the creationists in the community) are a vocal minority, but I don't know''.
Many school districts across Kansas have gone on the record that despite the action by the state board, they will continue to include the teaching of evolution and related subjects in their curricula.
But Mead and Bitter, both veteran teachers with standing in their community, and other pro-evolutionists expressed concern about the effect of the board's action in smaller, more fundamentally religious communities.
``Eighty percent of the biology teachers in this state are in small towns,'' said Steve Case, the coordinator for the Kansas Collaborative Research Network, an Internet research resource, and one of the members of the team that wrote the original state science standards.
``Are we going to expect a teacher in a particularly religious, pro-creationist community to stand up and say that evolution is science and should be taught?
I think a lot of teachers are going to take the path of least resistance and bow to the local pressure''.
&QL; XXXX END OF STORY &QL;
Don Johanson, director of the Institute of Human Origins at Arizona State University, doesn't believe in evolution.
He doesn't (beginitalic)believe(enditalic) in gravity either.
If that sounds heretical for a man of science, Johanson says that evolution is ``not a matter of belief.
It's a matter of fact''.
Evolution, which explains how plant and animal species arise and why we have diversity among species, is the keystone of modern biology.
It is one of the most widely accepted notions in science, ranking alongside gravity, the heliocentric view of the solar system (planets revolve around the sun) and the roundness of Earth.
Yet some doubters, mostly in America, reject the principles proposed by British naturalist Charles Darwin and detailed in his 1859 treatise (beginitalic)On the Origin of Species.
(enditalic) Darwin said that life on Earth began with simple organisms and evolved into more sophisticated species over many thousands of years through a process called natural selection.
Species adapt to their environment and pass on genetic characteristics to their offspring.
To proponents of creationism, the universe was created by God through a process set forth in the first book of the Bible, Genesis.
God created all species simultaneously, the world was completed in six days and humans descended from Adam and Eve - not earlier primates.
This month marks the 75th anniversary of the most celebrated debate between those theories - the Scopes ``monkey'' trial, in which a young Tennessee science teacher was prosecuted for violating the state's prohibition against teaching evolution.
He was convicted but fined only $100, and the law was eventually repealed.
The controversy did not end there.
Scientists before Darwin had speculated about the diversity of life.
But it wasn't until such publications as (beginitalic)Origin of Species (enditalic)defined the concept of natural selection that the process was made clear.
Darwin's book sold out in one day.
Almost immediately, scientists and then the public applauded his principles as sound though incomplete.
Over the past century and a half, those principles have been even more solidly established, says Jane Maienschein, professor of biology and philosophy at ASU.
``It's becoming more strongly confirmed as basic to science,'' she says.
In some ways, it is even better understood than gravity.
``Evolution explains everything about life,'' says ASU genetics professor Elliott Goldstein.
By the turn of the century, evolution was generally accepted and had found its way into America's classrooms.
Then religious leaders began a crusade.
Accepted for the most part overseas, evolution has had a roller coaster ride in the United States.
Last year the Kansas Board of Education voted to delete virtually any mention of evolution from the state's science curriculum.
In Arizona schools, teaching evolution is allowed, but some teachers who fear protests decline.
Legislators from time to time try to ban evolution or include creationism.
Why the battle?
``We've done a poor job of explaining it,'' says Goldstein.
``That's it in a nutshell''.
Maienschein agrees.
Anti-evolutionists insist the term ``theory of evolution'' suggests scientists are uncertain of the facts.
But the word ``theory'' does not mean ``guess,'' she says.
Scientists define theory as a series of provable facts, an organizing framework that has predictions and is testable.
Darwin was not the first scientist to shake the faithful.
In the 16th century, Polish astronomer Nicholas Copernicus put forth the startling notion that the Earth revolved around the sun, instead of the reverse.
Alarmed citizens of the Earth feared that God would not be able to find them if their planet were constantly moving.
To remove Earth from the center of the solar system was disturbing enough, but then Darwin removed humans from the center of the animal kingdom.
The Bible taught that man was given dominion over the creatures of the Earth.
Darwin's ideas instead put man on a par with every creature from gnats to whales.
Darwin, who followed the tenets of the Church of England as well as Unitarianism, was a reluctant prophet.
Knowing his findings would be unsettling, he published his research only at the urging of his wife.
At the same time, Austrian monk Gregor Mendel was developing rudimentary theories of genetics, though they would largely be ignored until scientists rediscovered his work around 1900.
The field of genetics took root in the 1930s, building on Darwin's studies and reinforcing evidence seen but not yet explained.
While some people find belief in a divine creator easier than understanding genes and chromosomes, Goldstein sees science and faith as compatible.
He equates God's work with the forces of nature and sees the Bible not as a scientific textbook but as a metaphor.
``I believe the Bible is God-inspired,'' Goldstein says.
``To believe in God doesn't mean you have to believe in creationism''.
To endorse creationism, he says, is to deny nearly all scientific fields, including geology, astronomy, biology, physics and chemistry.
And to deny the elegant workings of evolution is to miss the beauty of such a grand mechanism.
``I feel sorry for them,'' he says of creationists.
``They're missing God's wonders because they're misinterpreting God's words''.
Save the pity, says Dale Langmade, president of the Arizona Origin Science Association.
``He doesn't need to feel sorry for me, because I can see the same beauty in intelligent design''.
Fundamental Christians like Langmade take the Bible literally in its explanation of the creation of the universe, he says, though some agree the Earth is older than 6,000 years.
Some support the notion of natural selection as one of God's tools.
Langmade, who attended ASU and the University of Alaska, takes exception to the idea that creationists cannot embrace the panorama of science if they reject evolution.
``That's a cheap shot,'' he says, noting that such legendary scientists as Copernicus, Galileo, Isaac Newton and Francis Crick were men of faith.
Langmade has spent time admiring the strata in the walls of the Grand Canyon, which he calls evidence of the Biblical account of the Great Flood.
God put humans in charge of the animal kingdom, he says, because they were created in God's image: ``Man is the image of God, not flies''.
But what most disturbs anti-evolutionists is that the theory appears to remove God from life's equation.
Larry Kisner, a retired physicist in the aerospace industry and editor of the Arizona Origin Science Association newsletter, believes a secular explanation of the origin of the universe negates moral absolutes.
He points out that evolution has been used to justify eugenics and racism.
``Evolution is also a religion,'' Kisner says.
``It's paganism''.
And there's a reason that America more than Europe champions the crusade against what has been dubbed ``evil-ution''.
``America has been the moral agent of the world for many generations,'' Kisner says.
``We were founded that way.
{hellip} That's why the battle is fiercer here''.
Scientists are waging their own battle, fearing America suffers if evolution is not taught in schools.
The public must be informed on such issues as genetic research, the overuse of antibiotics, the human genome project - all of which are built upon evolutionary principles, Maienschein says.
Yet a poll commissioned by the liberal civil rights group People for the American Way found that while 83percent of Americans favor teaching evolution in public schools, 79percent think creationism also has a place in the classroom.
Such reports are ``good news and bad news,'' says science writer Jonathan Weiner, whose book, (beginitalic)The Beak of the Finch: A Story of Evolution in Our Time(enditalic), won the 1995 Pulitzer Prize for non-fiction.
Weiner takes heart that a majority of respondents support the teaching of evolution, and he does believe students should learn that some religious beliefs dispute those teachings.
But, he says, ``Every educated person should know and understand the theory of evolution.
It's such a beautiful theory''.
Weiner understands why this is a sometimes frightening period in scientific history.
Cloning, gene therapy, genetic engineering - where does it stop?
Will scientists some day construct human beings not just with a choice of hair and eye color but with specific behavioral and personality traits as well?
Evolution is sometimes taken as a symbol of science run amok.
In times of uncertainty, Weiner says, people embrace the familiar and reject notions that appear too revolutionary.
Creationists want to halt the revolution.
``What's at stake here is the future of our children, our society and our world if our children are taught that there is no God or that they must compartmentalize their faith from school,'' Kisner says.
Maienschein argues that evolution will be the savior of a fragile world.
``We can screw up the environment and then save it,'' she says.
``That's a source of hope''.
Tim Koors/The Arizona RepublicIs a 3 million-year-old male skull on display at the Institute of Human Origins in Tempe an ancestor of modern man?
It was both tragedy and triumph that when ``On the Origin of Species'' was published in 1859, Charles Darwin's name became a synonym for evolution.
Though Darwin studiously avoided mentioning humans in his book, religious leaders immediately saw ``Darwinism'' as a dangerous anti-religion, a godless belief system that removed the Creator from creation and made his greatest idea, man, the grandchild of mere apes.
Over time, Darwin's ideas have prevailed.
Most mainstream religions have come to an accommodation with them, though a vocal minority still rejects evolution and propounds biblically-derived creationist theories.
The triumph of Darwin was the brilliant way the former ministry student distilled and explained the mechanism of life.
His thesis of descent with modification via natural selection immediately clicked with people who took the time to consider it.
So obvious was it to zoologist Thomas Henry Huxley that he exclaimed, ``How extremely stupid not to have thought of that''.
But Darwin did not just cause readers to smack their heads and utter, ``Duh''.
He fundamentally changed the way all of us _ including every rejectionist, whether he admits it or not _ see the world.
In ``Darwin's Ghost,'' a fascinating and witty book that tours the same intellectual territory as Darwin, Steve Jones, a British geneticist, shows how extensively Darwin's theory explains the natural world.
At heart, his is an argument with both the remaining skeptics of evolution and those who persist in misapplying Darwin's theory in realms such as sociology.
Natural selection, Jones neatly observes, is a dumb but relentless machine that works with the materials at hand.
Most of its products do not last.
``Who could ever have designed a tree kangaroo''?
But ``clumsy as the animal may seem, it is infinitely better adapted to the most complex conditions of life, and plainly bears the stamp of far higher workmanship, than anything achieved by man''.
Which is why engineers of recent years have been studying natural forms to tease out design ideas.
The more sophisticated school of creationism, of course, may see in the word ``workmanship'' a hint of ``intelligent design'' and thus of a deus in the machina of natural selection.
Empty logic, says Jones.
Natural selection is the ``plodding accumulation of error''.
Given enough time to work through enough mistakes, anything _ velociraptor, tree kangaroo, homo sapien _ will turn up.
So why get caught up in a material-world argument, asks Jones.
``The birth of Adam, whether real or metaphorical, marked the insertion into an animal body of a post-biological soul that leaves no fossils and needs no genes''.
The flesh, he wisely notes, is not a good place to go hunting for the things of spirit.
A big part of Jones's book is devoted to human, as opposed to natural, selection _ the breeding programs and hybridization campaigns that humans have conducted with cattle, dogs, wheat, and a thousand more species for the past 13,000 years.
Domesticated life forms, he says, are ``silent witnesses to the malleability of nature''.
That very malleability, combined with human technological prowess, is why we have arrived at a portentious moment.
Though he doesn't spend much time on the subject, it is clear that Jones believes human cloning and increasingly bizarre forms of hybridization are, if not now underway somewhere, certainly imminent and probably dangerous.
Jones does not wave the chicken-little banner of ``Frankenfood'' in this book, but here is a geneticist clearly alarmed at the dangers of genetic manipulation.
Already, he points out, beneficial genes inserted into oilseed rape to promote herbicide resistance have seeped into wild mustards and radishes.
``Industry's optimism about the nature and stability of species is unfounded,'' he says.
``Those who cast down the barriers to hybridism will soon be reminded of what evolution can do''.
``Darwin's Ghost'' is written with great authority and a fluid style, and it is refreshing not to have footnotes littering the text.
But Jones fails to include substantial back-of-the-book chapter notes to anchor disembodied quotes and expand upon interesting facts.
It is true that light or nonexistent footnotes are more the British than the American style, but combined with breezy writing the effect on a reader is an unnecessary wobbliness about facts.
Then there's the conceit of this book _ the ``Darwin's ghost'' theme.
It is a little misleading.
Happily, Jones does not walk in Darwin's footsteps or retrace the voyage of the Beagle.
That would get old fast.
He properly honors Darwin throughout the book, but his republication of Darwin's chapter summaries and recapitulation seem contrived.
``Origin'' is readily available (even on the Net).
Unannotated chunks of it do little good in this book.
Where Jones is especially good is in a quick putdown of some of the wilder claims of sociobiology.
``Evolution is a political sofa that molds itself into the buttocks of the last to sit upon it,'' he notes.
Marxists and ultra-capitalists have both seized on it at times.
So, too, have agenda-driven scientists and journalists.
In a whack at the all-in-our-genes school, he says, ``Sexual fidelity or promiscuity seems, according to taste, the natural thing to do; families are often a joy, and patriotism arouses some, but we do not need natural selection to tell us why''.
If Darwin had a ghost _ a free-floating post-biological soul _ it would enjoy that defense of his theory against the latest crop of misusers.
BOSTON _ What a contradictory country this is.
More than any other, it has always been open to new ideas, to change.
Looking to the future instead of the past, it has made itself a great force, not just in world markets but in the world of ideas.
Yet there is also an America locked in rigid certainties and shibboleths.
That other part of our divided national character, the second America, is displayed in the effort to put the Bible ahead of science in schools.
The advocates speak of ``creation science,'' replacing the Darwinian theory that life forms evolved over millions of years with the biblical account that God created the earth and its creatures in six days.
Most of us thought the attempt to stifle the teaching of evolution was a fringe phenomenon.
Hadn't it been effectively disabled by the Scopes trial three-quarters of a century ago?
Then, in August, the Kansas Board of Education voted to downgrade the teaching of evolution in public schools.
A new curriculum it approved removed evolution from the state tests that students have to take.
The Kansas board also took aim at the science of the cosmos, voting to delete from its standards the Big Bang theory of how the universe originated around 15 billion years ago.
James Glanz of The New York Times, in an article this week, called attention to the even more sweeping effects of that aspect of the board's action.
Creationists argue that the earth is only a few thousand years old.
That view calls into question many fundamentals of science today, such as radiocarbon dating _ which shows that rocks on our planet are millions of years old.
Indeed, the whole scientific understanding of the universe would have to be discarded.
The creationist position is certainly not a fringe belief nowadays.
A Gallup poll taken in June for CNN and USA Today found that 68 percent of those surveyed favored teaching creationism along with evolution in public schools; 40 percent favored dropping evolution altogether and teaching children only the biblical version of creation.
High-ranking American politicians have taken to condemning the idea of evolution.
After the massacre in Columbine High School in Colorado in April, Rep.
Tom DeLay, the House majority whip, put the blame on the teaching of children ``that they are nothing but glorified apes who are evolutionized out of some primordial soup of mud''.
The argument made against teaching evolution, in Kansas and elsewhere, is that no one was there to see how life began _ and students should be given only firsthand evidence.
In Alabama, consistent with that view, all students are warned: ``No one was present when life first appeared on earth.
Therefore, any statement about life's origins should be considered as theory, not fact''.
Of course evolution is a theory.
The whole ethos of science is that any explanation for the myriad mysteries in our universe is a theory, subject to challenge and experiment.
That is the scientific method.
Those who take the biblical account of creation literally reject the scientific method, offering instead a doctrine of faith.
There are ``creation scientists'' who argue that the Bible can be squared with scientific observations of, for example, the age of the universe.
But they are not taken seriously by most scientists.
The interesting question is why a large body of opinion in the United States supports a view at such odds with contemporary scientific understanding.
No other Western country has anything like it.
Religious fundamentalists have played an important part in America from the earliest settlements.
And religious belief is much stronger in the United States today than in other Western societies.
But belief does not usually, elsewhere, lead to opposing the teaching of evolution.
Perhaps rejection of the scientific method reflects a turning away from unhappy aspects of our contemporary society _ greed, vulgarity and the like.
Some Americans think we are, as the title of Robert Bork's book puts it, ``Slouching Towards Gomorrah''.
Concern about aspects of American life is fair enough.
But depriving children of the great ideas of science cannot make things better.
We thought we had advanced since Galileo was silenced for advancing the theory that the earth revolves around the sun. &QL;
By KATE BEEM Knight Ridder Newspapers KANSAS CITY, Mo.
_ Someone created every thing in the universe, Celtie Johnson believes.
Someone made the pen she writes with.
Someone made the keyboard she types on.
All complex systems are designed by someone, so it follows that life, the most complex system of all, has a designer, too, said Johnson, of Prairie Village, Kan.
``No one's saying who that intelligent designer is,'' she said.
To Johnson, evolution simply makes no sense.
She rejects the evidence most scientists say supports the theory that all living things share common ancestors.
She firmly believes in the biblical account of creation.
Early this year she mounted a campaign to turn the Kansas science community on its ear.
Judging from the agitation in the state over evolution, there is evidence she has succeeded: - In the beginning, the Kansas Board of Education and the state education commissioner appointed a 27-member committee of science teachers and professors to write new science standards for public schools.
The committee's version described the theory of evolution as a ``unifying concept'' for all science disciplines.
It drew objections from those who do not believe in evolution.
Late last winter, Johnson pulled together a loosely knit group of creationists from Kansas and Missouri who drafted an alternate version of the standards.
The alternate draft, presented to the state board, defined both evolution and creation in its glossary.
It also defined the battle that would occupy the state board for months.
- Johnson visited the Kansas board again and again, urging members to reject the committee's science standards in favor of her group's standards.
- She also formed the National Committee for Excellence in Science Education, which helps people in other states who want to question evolution.
The group intends to offer the alternate science standards written by Johnson and others to people in other states.
Steve Abrams, a conservative Kansas Board of Education member from Arkansas City, Kan.
, presented the alternate standards Johnson helped write.
``She was very dedicated and wants to see good science in Kansas,'' said Abrams, a veterinarian.
Val DeFever, a moderate board member from Independence, Kan.
, said Johnson was determined to sway board members to her point of view.
``I just explained to her we weren't on the same wavelength,'' said DeFever, who supported the standards written by the science teachers.
``We were both committed to our viewpoints, and it really would be a waste of time''.
Johnson says she wanted scientists to explain why, as she sees it, evolution is immune from question and why other explanations for the origins of life cannot be considered in science classes.
``I admire her dedication,'' said Ken Ham, executive director of the creationist organization Answers in Genesis, based in Kentucky.
``I admire her trying to do these things''.
Johnson's critics say that, under the guise of science, she is trying to inject into the public schools her religious belief that God created the universe.
John van Keppel of Leawood, Kan.
, an evolution supporter, says Johnson does not understand science well enough to dispute the facts of evolution.
The evidence against evolution that Johnson and other creationists say is being censored by mainstream science is a cut-and-paste job, said Charlotte McDonald, the Blue Valley School District's science coordinator.
``She is not presenting the whole scientific information,'' McDonald said.
``If you're going to take things out of context, you can refute anything you want to refute''.
Fliers at malls Johnson, a 43-year-old mother of four, shares her beliefs with most people she meets.
She begins many conversations with creation naysayers by asking, ``What do you know about evolution to be true''?
In 1995 she and her brother asked the Shawnee Mission School District to use Of Pandas and People, a science textbook that puts forth intelligent design _ the idea that an intelligent being created Earth and everything in it.
District officials said they considered the text but rejected it.
Johnson and her husband began visiting shopping malls on weekends to place homemade creationist fliers on cars.
The fliers contained passages such as this: ``The theory of evolution is just a theory, yet our public school's texts do not mention the significant amount of scientific evidence against it.
Why the censorship''?
For Johnson and her husband, Eric, 37, the truth about how the universe came to be is readily available and has been for centuries.
``You have to believe the Bible is true,'' said Eric Johnson, a stockbroker.
``If it's not true, it's just a paperweight''.
Celtie Johnson said she was not completely against evolution being taught.
She said she just wanted teachers to feel comfortable presenting the pros and cons of Charles Darwin's theory.
Many feel pressured to teach evolution as a fact, she said.
She has been told, subtly and not, to sit down and shut up.
She has not.
``I feel confident that most humans have common sense, that they can critically think,'' Johnson said.
``I don't want them to be plagued with believing evolution, because it's not true''.
&LR; brk:Macro vs.
micro Some on the 10-member Kansas Board of Education agreed with Johnson, and in August the board approved science standards that contained references to microevolution, or adaptation, but no mention of macroevolution, or change from one species to another.
The revised version no longer lists evolution as one of science's unifying concepts.
The revised standards also omit many references to the age of Earth.
There is no longer any mention of the big-bang theory _ the idea that the universe was born in an explosion of matter and radiation between 12 billion and 20 billion years ago.
Those deletions are significant to ``young Earth creationists'' such as Johnson who believe that the Earth was created in six 24-hour days sometime in the last 7,000 years.
Creationists say they have evidence that supports this belief: - It takes about 300 to 1,000 years to form an inch of topsoil, but the worldwide average depth is about 7 to 8 inches, which means the Earth is only a few thousand years old, creationists say.
Evolutionists respond that that argument does not take erosion into account.
- The eruption of Mount St.
Helens in 1980 produced 25 feet of finely layered sediment and gouged canyons in one afternoon, which shows that millions of years are not required to form rock layers.
This lends credence to the global flood and other catastrophic events in the Bible, creationists say.
Evolutionists say erosion happens at variable rates all over the world.
Catastrophes explain some geologic formations but not all.
- Earth's magnetic field has been decaying rapidly, which creationists say points to an age younger than 10,000 years.
Evolutionists counter that the decay is not steady and that much evidence exists for several reversals of the decay rate.
Most creationists say that scientific theories must be observable.
Although it is true that monkey blood and human blood are similar, that is not evidence the two species are related, said Glen Kailer of Perry, Kan.
, a researcher with the Creation Science Association for Mid-America.
Creationists view that similarity as more proof of design, Kailer said.
``A Chevy and a Ford are not descended from a common ancestor,'' Kailer said.
Neither evolution nor creation can be tested or has been observed, but creationists say their theory has a witness: the Bible.
Evolutionists, on the other hand, believe that some science works in the comparative mode, said Ed Wiley, a University of Kansas evolutionary biologist.
Something that is true for one life form will be true for another.
One particular point of contention is transitional life forms.
Creationists say that scientists have not found any fossils of transitional animals and that no transitional animals exist today.
They do not believe that animals such as the archaeopteryx, a bird with reptile characteristics that some scientists think links birds and dinosaurs, are transitional.
Indeed, the archaeopteryx is not a true intermediate form between birds and reptiles, Wiley said.
But it had transitional characteristics between the two species, such as wings and reptilian attributes, he said.
Wiley said creationists would not ever accept the archaeopteryx as a transitional animal, because it was too dangerous to their faith in a God so powerful he could create everything just as it is today.
More specifically, believing that Earth is older than described in the first chapter of Genesis threatens some creationists' understanding of the basis of their faith, said Keith Miller, an evangelical Christian and a geologist at Kansas State University.
Most Christians, Miller said, find no conflict with believing that God could have used evolution to create the universe.
Biblical literalists cannot accept that, he said.
If the days in Genesis actually were millions or billions of years, dinosaurs would have lived and died long before humans.
That would mean death and dying came long before Adam and Eve were cast out of the Garden of Eden in what Christians know as the Fall of Man, Miller said.
That is in direct conflict with a literal reading of the Bible.
``They view their interpretation of Scripture as being primary,'' Miller said.
``They don't accept the validity of nonbiblical sources of truth.
Everything comes through a scriptural lens''.
For Miller and Wiley, evolution is a fact of nature with many theories of how it works.
But for people such as Johnson and Ham, evolution is a philosophical belief system just like creation.
Ham said both groups agreed on observable facts such as natural selection and mutation.
Those things are ``what we observe in the present,'' Ham said.
``In trying to connect to the past, you have to use faith''.
&LR; brk:`Days in shock' Celtie and Eric Johnson think many scientists overlook evolution's missing details, such as transitional fossils, and teach the scientific theory as proven fact to unsuspecting science students.
Celtie Johnson said she spent decades believing that humans evolved from lower forms and that species could change into other species over millions of years.
A former premedicine major, she faults a belief in evolution for leading her to make bad decisions as she struggled through more than one divorce and a life she saw as purposeless and random.
``It's dog eat dog,'' Johnson said.
``That's what I was living.
It was survival of the fittest''.
Then one day about five years ago she was talking to her brother, a mechanical engineer, and he brought up intelligent design.
Johnson said she did not have a clue as to what he was talking about.
She knew only about evolution.
But her brother told her there was overwhelming evidence against evolution.
Something clicked.
Johnson began to research creation.
Soon Eric Johnson joined in.
They began to feel more and more duped by their science classes, Celtie Johnson said.
``We spent days in shock,'' she said.
When the shock wore off, Johnson said, she decided she had to spread the word.
She joined the Creation Science Association, seeking more information.
It was Johnson's insistence that the Kansas science standards were flawed that drew together the band of writers who drafted the alternate standards, said Kailer, one of the writers.
Johnson's motivation was good science, he said.
``Celtie is not at all alone,'' he said.
``Celtie is one of the thousands who recognize the absurdity of evolution as science''.
But she is one of the few willing to speak out, said Linda Highland of Olathe, who first met Johnson at a legislative forum some years back.
Highland said the state board made the right decision in August, and she credited Johnson for helping board members find the strength to take a stand.
``I think that maybe she builds courage in others by showing that she isn't afraid to take this issue on,'' Highland said.
Johnson said she was motivated by the search for truth.
``I don't know what it is.
Maybe some people have the ability to see the proof,'' she said.
``I think the majority of people believe in evolution because they don't have the facts.''
RENO, Nev.
_ Cissy Bennett, a high school biology teacher in Birmingham, Ala.
, has to use a textbook with a disclaimer in it.
``Evolution,'' says the message from the Alabama State Board of Education, ``is a controversial theory some scientists present as scientific explanation for the origin of living things, such as plants, animals and humans.
No one was present when life first appeared on earth.
Therefore, any statement about life's origins should be considered as theory, not fact''.
That does not deter Ms.
Bennett from teaching her students that humans and all other species developed from common ancestors under the influence of natural selection.
``I tell them on the first day, `We are going to learn about evolution,' '' she said.
`` `I do not care if you believe what I am saying, but you will learn'.
'' But some teachers are more intimidated by the disclaimer.
One colleague, Ms.
Bennett said, once told her that she thought teaching evolution was against the law.
It has been 73 years since another high school biology teacher, John Scopes, was found guilty under Tennessee law for teaching that humans and apes descended from a common ancestor, and 30 years since the United States Supreme Court essentially overturned the Scopes ruling and declared that states could not prohibit teachers from discussing evolution.
But Charles Darwin's theory still faces challenges in the nation's classrooms from increasingly sophisticated creationists, state and local school boards that leave evolution out of science education, and many biology teachers who themselves reject evolution.
``The evolution-creation controversy is as charged today as it was when Scopes was tried,'' said Randy Moore, a professor of biology at Louisville University in Kentucky and the editor of The American Biology Teacher, a magazine published by the National Association of Biology Teachers.
``Creationists are more powerful than ever.
They're winning, not in terms of courts cases, but what happens in classrooms.
I get three to five phone calls a week from teachers with problems''.
A recent caller, Moore said, told him that a high school principal in Louisville had used the public address system in his school to announce that evolution had been overthrown and no longer needed to be taught.
Faced with incidents like these, teachers of evolution have been in ``a defensive mode,'' said Wayne Carley, executive director of the 7,500-member biology teachers association.
The association and other groups like the National Academy of Sciences and the largest professional group of evolutionists, the Society for the Study of Evolution, are embarking on a concerted effort to change the way Americans view evolution.
Evolution was at the center of the biology teachers' annual convention, which brought Moore and Ms.
Bennett and about 1,500 other teachers to Reno this month.
Teachers heard about the latest challenges in the classroom, received a copy of a book published earlier this year by the National Academy of Sciences about teaching evolution, and crowded into more than a dozen workshops on teaching the theory.
``When you combine the lack of emphasis on evolution in kindergarten through 12th grade, with the immense popularity of creationism among the public, and the industry of discrediting evolution,'' Moore said, ``it's easy to see why half of the population believes humans were created 10,000 years ago and lived with dinosaurs.
It is by far the biggest failure of science education from top to bottom''.
The challenges to teaching evolution have changed, said Dr.
Eugenie C.
Scott, executive director of the National Center for Science Education, which monitors the teaching of creationism in schools and communities nationwide.
The latest wrinkle, Scott said, is to try to introduce into the classroom other theories like ``intelligent design'' _ the idea that the universe is so impossibly complex that it must have been designed on purpose by an omniscient creator.
Creationism ranges from literal interpretations of Genesis in the Bible to the belief that God created and set in motion the process of evolution itself, a view shared by up to 40 percent of scientists according to national surveys.
Phillip E.
Johnson, a law professor at the University of California at Berkeley, who has written four books attacking ``the dogmatic teaching of Darwinian evolution,'' advocates that students be taught to be distrustful of the evolution theory.
Johnson is affiliated with Access Research Network, a group in Colorado Springs, Colo.
, that promotes intelligent design in the biology textbook ``Of Pandas and People''.
At the convention, some sessions featured well-established lessons like comparing early hominid skulls and fossil footprints to the heads and feet of students in classes.
But other workshops discussed current research in evolutionary biology and how the latest findings could be used to add new life to lessons.
&QL; nn The Human Genome Project, for example, is finding an increasing number of genes that are shared by different species, from worms to mice to humans.
The ability of bacteria that cause infections to become increasingly resistant to antibiotics, and the resistance insects develop to pesticides offer real life examples of evolution.
Teachers were even shown a case where HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, developed a resistance to different drugs within a patient suffering from the disease.
The association honored two high school science teachers who served on the front lines in the legal fight to teach evolution.
Susan Epperson of Arkansas and Don Aguillard of Louisiana both took legal cases to the United States Supreme Court.
Epperson vs.
Arkansas outlawed state bans on teaching evolution in 1968, and in Edwards vs.
Aguillard, the Court ruled in 1987 that states could not require that ``creation science'' be taught along with evolution.
The two teachers, who volunteered to serve in these test cases, have become folk heroes to some biology teachers.
They have been stopped in the halls to autograph programs and have their pictures taken.
But despite their legal victories, Ms.
Epperson and Aguillard warned that the battle goes on.
``The fight has shifted from people like Susan and myself to you,'' Aguillard told the teachers.
``The task has shifted from constitutional challenges to grass roots efforts''.
In a recent survey of 387 Louisiana biology teachers, Aguillard found that 24 percent believed in creationism and 29 percent believed it was appropriate for high school biology classes.
Some teachers he interviewed said they ignored evolution, and one told Aguillard, ``I try to poke as many holes in it as I can''.
To Aguillard and others in the biology teachers association those findings, which echo previous studies in other states, indicate that creationism is not fading away, but is itself evolving.
The center for science education is involved in a court case challenging a school board resolution in Tangipahoa, La.
, that instructs teachers to read a disclaimer recommending that students consider ``other concepts'' than evolution.
The center is also mulling a legal challenge to the Alabama disclaimer, but that may be tough, said Scott, because the warning is written with finesse.
``This is bad science, and the First Amendment doesn't protect us from bad science,'' she said.
``We would have to convince a judge that it is a disguised sectarian religious view''.
Cissy Bennett, for one, is not sure that a legal challenge is the way to go.
People are tired of the controversy, she said.
Biology teachers in Alabama won a fight to get decent textbooks that include evolution.
The disclaimer ``seemed like a good compromise,'' she said, adding: ``We're able to get around it.
Most teachers just teach their stuff and ignore it''.
At their annual meeting, biology teachers shared strategies for dealing with problems in class.
Most start their classes by discussing the differences between science and religion, and talk about the limits of science and the fact that theories are always subject to correction and change.
Some teachers acknowledge their own faiths and offer to talk with students outside class.
Most have found ways to go on teaching evolution.
``You don't change very many minds,'' said Greg Wickett, a 10th grade biology teacher in Oregon.
``When a kid is 15 years old, of course his minister and parents are influencing him more than his teachers.
That's how it should be.
I've had students who called me the devil.
I told them I wasn't trying to convert them.
I'm not trying to teach them religion''.
Dr. Irene Eckstrand, who heads a new education committee of the Society for the Study of Evolution, says she believes it is almost inevitable that teachers will be defensive.
``They're held accountable to so many people,'' said Dr.
Eckstrand, whose group is working with the teachers association to integrate new research into classes.
``Teachers are on the front line.
But I'd like to see us not be so defensive.
We have a wonderful story to tell.''
KANSAS CITY, Mo.
_ Think of it as an educational tug of war.
On the one side, the establishment that has run the nation's public school systems for years.
On the other, social conservatives who say liberalized public education is destroying the country's moral fabric.
In the middle, millions of children.
It is a national phenomenon, but nowhere are the two sides pulling harder than in Kansas.
The state's 10-member elected Board of Education is split evenly along ideological lines.
Five members are moderate Republicans or Democrats, and five, all Republicans, are Christian conservatives.
The struggle is likely to intensify this week, as the board takes up new science standards and an old question: How did life and the universe begin?
Evolution would be taught as a cornerstone of science in revised standards the board will consider Wednesday.
The standards spell out what children would learn and be tested on, and they do not mention creationism.
A conservative board member is expected to introduce a competing proposal that questions the validity of evolutionary theory.
It also describes creation as being the result of ``intelligent design''.
Although they lack a majority, the conservatives have had an effect since they first gained control of half the seats in 1996.
Through a series of 5-5 votes and the compromises that followed, the conservatives have forced new curriculum standards and testing methods, and they have stalled implementation of some federal programs.
Bill Meek, a moderate Republican who lost a bid for the state board in 1996, says the frequent gridlock has hurt Kansas.
``If we stand still, people really do pass us by,'' said Meek, a member of the Spring Hill, Kan.
, Board of Education.
``I don't think there's such a thing as standing still anymore.
You either go forward, or you regress''.
He pointed to the board's 5-5 deadlock last year on accepting federal money through the Workforce Investment Act, which provides aid to states that develop career programs.
Meek says such programs help students make choices about the future.
Christian conservatives object to such programs because, they say, they steer students toward jobs that businesses say are in demand instead of leaving those decisions to the students and their families.
Last summer state board members deadlocked on a plan that was intended to give students more advanced, real-world math skills.
Conservatives objected because the plan would have allowed the use of calculators _ considered a crutch _ instead of requiring math by hand only.
The moderates compromised.
The standards, approved in March almost a year after first reaching the board, now focus on basic mathematics and prohibit elementary students from using calculators on state tests.
Kevin Gilmore, a conservative from Olathe, Kan.
, who was chairman of the Kansas state board for two years, views the deadlocks as the democratic process at work.
If the conservatives don't always get their way, he said, that is the democratic process, as well.
His colleagues are not the strident radicals they are sometimes painted to be by political foes, Gilmore said.
``I don't view any of them as extremists,'' he said.
``I don't think extremists get elected''.
Kansas is not the only place where Christian conservatives are making their voices heard: - In Texas conservative members of the state school board pushed through a biology textbook with few references to evolution.
In Alabama a conservative group persuaded state legislators to have a disclaimer about evolution pasted inside every biology text, a move that the National Center for Science Education said intimidated teachers from introducing the subject.
Other national groups support creationism and ``creation science,'' the theory that the Earth is just a few thousand years old and that the dinosaurs died out in the Great Flood, recorded in Genesis.
Courts repeatedly have struck down efforts to teach such theories in science classes.
- Like their Kansas counterparts, Christian conservatives in Ohio and Michigan have opposed the federal Workforce Investment Act and its School-to-Work program.
- ``Parental rights'' initiatives have cropped up in recent years in Congress and in more than 20 states, including Kansas, Indiana, Michigan and Colorado.
Conservatives say the bills would guarantee parents' rights to raise their children.
Liberals and moderates say the bills would make it easier for parents to challenge school teachings on religious grounds.
About half of the members of the Texas school board are Christian conservatives.
Additional states in which Christian conservatives have significant representation on local and state boards include California, Ohio and Virginia.
In Missouri state school board members are appointed by the governor.
Wide-ranging power The Kansas Board of Education dictates much of what is taught in the state's public schools.
The board has sweeping authority over the state's 304 public school districts, as well as its vocational schools, community colleges and schools for the deaf and the blind, but not the state universities.
It can require any program it wishes without seeking the approval of the governor or the Legislature.
The deadlocked votes have upset some state lawmakers.
Feeling pressure, board members have split the board's two-year chairmanship, which controls the board agenda.
Linda Holloway, a conservative from Shawnee, Kan.
, is chairwoman this year; Harold Roth, a moderate from Haven, Kan.
, will be chairman in 2000.
The board hoped to send voters a message that it would try to avoid deadlock.
Indeed, in March, the board unanimously approved the compromise math standards.
But a state audit of the board's performance in the last two years said the deadlocks had frustrated teachers and school administrators across Kansas.
``The tie votes are seen by some as a lack of decision-making,'' said the report, released in March.
Some lawmakers have worried that conservative members would try to reverse reform efforts such as Quality Performance Accreditation, the state's moderate-supported school improvement program.
Under the program, schools are accredited based on how well students learn specific subjects rather than on standards such as the numbers of books the schools have.
The accreditation effort developed alongside the state's new school-finance formula, and both took effect in the early 1990s.
The Legislature saw the new accreditation system as a way to link accountability and school funding.
Quality Performance Accreditation has remained intact, but conservatives have slowed the programs that the previous board was enacting.
The accreditation testing program, for example, almost died after conservatives voted not to renew it in 1997.
A compromise was reached later when moderates, in part, agreed to scrap subjective tests, which the conservatives disliked.
Finding a voice Christian conservatives think public schools have turned away from the country's educational foundation: Schools run by churches that taught right and wrong from one basic text, the Bible.
Now, Christian conservatives are just trying to have a voice, said Sam Blumenfeld, a conservative scholar in Boston who writes for the online news service WorldNet Daily.
Blumenfeld said public schools ``undermine Christians' ability to influence their children''.
Christian conservatives want to return to a time when public schools worked, he said.
America's founders, he said, were Calvinists who believed that man is, by nature, a depraved creature who needs fear of a higher power to do the right thing.
Public schools at one time were based on this philosophy, Blumenfeld said, but in recent decades the schools have been shaped by secular humanism, which holds that humans control their destinies.
Christian conservatives, he said, ``have no influence over what the public schools do.
Whatever policies they have are made by liberals''.
Christian conservatives say ``A Nation at Risk'' gave voice to their fears.
The report, released in the early 1980s by a presidential panel, sharply criticized American education.
That criticism was taken by Christian conservatives as an explanation of why society's bedrock _ the family _ was crumbling.
In a sense it validated social conservatives' opinions about higher rates of divorce, teen-age pregnancy and sexually transmitted disease.
America's children spend much of their time in school.
What were they learning there?
In recent years, several Christian conservative leaders, including ministers Pat Robertson and Jerry Falwell, have publicly stated their disdain for the nation's public education system.
In a speech at last fall's Christian Coalition national convention, Robertson said that 19th-century reformer John Dewey trained teachers to spread the ``poison'' of secular humanism into public schools.
Falwell has said public schools are a place of darkness.
Conservatives have decried tests that they say often contain open-ended questions to which students choose the best answer, not the right answer.
That's a form of moral relativism, in which there are no rights or wrongs, Christian conservatives say.
Comprehensive sex education in schools often presents abstinence as a choice, along with the use of contraception.
The context of marriage is not necessarily part of the lesson.
That undermines the Christian belief that sex outside marriage is wrong, conservatives said.
And in outcomes-based education, which grew out of the reforms of the 1980s, conservatives saw a trend toward focusing on children's social well-being and teaching political correctness at the cost of rigorous academics.
Education is a top priority of many national conservative organizations, such as Phyllis Schlafly's Eagle Forum and James Dobson's Focus on the Family.
These groups often have state chapters that can mobilize members for intense grass-roots campaigning, said Martha McCarthy, an Indiana University education professor who has studied the religious right.
Political action The conservatives' power stems from that political support, said Rob Boston, assistant director of communications for Americans United for the Separation of Church and State.
The group publishes a monthly newsletter that details the activities of the Christian right.
In recent years conservative leaders have mobilized their followers to vote for school board members and legislators who share their beliefs, and low voter turnout in many elections has ensured their success, Boston said.
Along with their claims that public schools are destroying America, many conservatives advocate publicly financed charter schools, homeschooling and aid, such as vouchers or tax credits, for parents who send their children to private schools.
``If they don't want to abolish the public schools, then they want to Christianize them,'' Boston said.
Similarities between conservatives' efforts across the country have caused groups such as the liberal People for the American Way and the Mainstream Coalition in Johnson County, Kan.
, to suggest that there is a concerted effort to discredit public schools.
Caroline McKnight, executive director of the Mainstream Coalition, a nonpartisan group that has been critical of the conservative movement, points to conservative literature criticizing school reform efforts by a handful of states.
Many of the publications use the same catch phrases, such as ``fuzzy standards'' and ``secular humanism''.
When the Christian conservatives won five of the 10 seats on the Kansas state board, some moderate and liberal groups warned that the conservative agendas showing up in other states would show up in Kansas.
The conservative board members ``have been elected to a position that's supposed to look out for the best interest of public schools,'' McKnight said.
``But the argument can be made that they don't like public education''.
Gilmore, the former board chairman, said he did not run for office out of any dislike for schools, but because for many years social conservatives had no voice in public education.
Holding office, he said, is the American way to ``have a voice in government to push conservative views''.
New standards The flap over evolution is heightening public interest in the new Kansas science standards, which the board will take up Wednesday.
The standards, which were written by a committee appointed by education Commissioner Andy Tompkins, list evolution as one of five unifying concepts that cut across the scientific disciplines.
Since January, when the standards first appeared before the board, Christian conservatives have urged board members to reject the document because evolution goes against their beliefs.
They want equal time for the belief that God alone created Earth and its creatures.
Many scientists and teachers have asked the board to focus on the consensus among scientists that biology, and other aspects of science, cannot be mastered without first understanding evolution.
Evolution _ the theory that life on Earth has mutated and adapted over millions of years _ is the accepted theory in the biological sciences, said Mary Blythe, an elementary science specialist in the Kansas City, Kan.
, School District and a member of the science standards committee.
Students need to be aware of all of the scientific theories to understand science, Blythe said.
That some conservatives continue to push for creationist ideas to be taught in science classes is a concern, she said.
Not for Kansas board member Steve Abrams, a conservative from Arkansas City, who rejects evolution.
On Wednesday he will give the other board members a different draft of the science standards written by a group of people who don't believe in evolution.
The document includes evolution and ``intelligent design'' _ the theory that life happened intentionally, not by chance _ under the heading ``historical science''.
``I just didn't like the standards that were proposed,'' Abrams said.
``And instead of sitting there complaining, I thought I would propose something I liked''.
Blythe and the other members of the science committee knew that weaving evolution through the standards would be controversial, but she said she was puzzled all the same.
``I've never had a conflict with evolution,'' she said.
``I felt like it was a mechanism that God started to make everything work.''
TOPEKA _ Conservatives won a major victory in Kansas on Wednesday when the state Board of Education approved new science standards that dilute the teaching of evolution.
In a 6-4 vote, the board ignored the recommendations of a 27-member state committee of scientists that spent a year drafting new standards.
The board adopted a modified version of the standards that leaves the question of teaching evolution to the state's 304 school districts.
Conservatives hailed the decision as a step forward.
But John Staver, co-chairman of the committee of scientists that drafted the standards, called it a ``travesty to science education'' and added: ``Kansas just embarrassed itself on the national stage''.
Indeed, the battle over science standards in Kansas has attracted attention across the nation.
Staver said all of the members of the science writing committee he had talked to _ more than half the total _ wanted their names removed from the standards.
They also want the board to remove the committee's dedication at the top of the standards, which said: ``Our children are the future of Kansas.
With this document, we pass on the legacy of our own teachers, who helped us to know that as lifelong learners of science, we can live more productive, responsible and fulfilling lives''.
The compromise version approved Wednesday was put together by conservative board members Scott Hill and Steven Abrams, and by Harold Voth, who had been considered a moderate.
Joining in the vote to adopt it were Linda Holloway, John Bacon and Mary Douglass Brown.
The version deletes references to macroevolution, the process of change from one species to another, but leaves references to microevolution, or changes within species.
It does not prohibit the teaching of evolution.
But some fear that teachers will drop the teaching because macroevolution will not be included on state tests.
There also are concerns that groups could bring pressure on teachers to drop evolution from the curriculum.
During the meeting, board member Janet Waugh complained that she did not have enough time to study the compromise version.
She wanted to delay the vote a month, she said, but was told before the meeting that the vote would go forward.
After the meeting, Hill said that 95 percent of the material in the compromise version was picked up from the writing committee's fifth draft, which the board never voted on.
``I didn't see (the other 5 percent) as that huge of a change that we had to start the process over again,'' he said, commenting on Waugh's request for a delay.
The new standards simply give more latitude to local school districts in deciding what to teach about the origin of life, conservatives said.
Most teachers probably will continue to teach evolution, Hill predicted.
``Where are you going to get a textbook that doesn't have evolution in it''? he said.
Staver, however, said he believed the changes approved remove evolution as a unifying concept tying the sciences together.
Also, he said, they open the door for the teaching of creation science and the theory of intelligent design, which essentially says a higher power created the universe.
A science specialist in the Kansas City, Kan.
, School District who was on the writing committee said she fears the changes also could open the door to the teaching of concepts that the conservatives don't want, such as New Age philosophies or ``occult-type things''.
``There could be a teacher somewhere or a group somewhere who would try to force that in,'' said Mary Blythe, district science specialist for K-5.
``It's a sad day for science in Kansas''.
Students who do not learn about evolution will be at a disadvantage when they take college entrance exams, she and others said.
The conservatives, however, dispute that.
National groups that monitor the teaching of evolution had predictable reactions to the board vote.
John Morris, president of the Institute for Creation Research, a California think tank of scientists that deals with issues of origin, applauded the action.
Fossil records and other facts ``seem to fit the creationism version of history better than the evolutionist version,'' Morris said.
``I think what the Kansas school board has done is a strong step forward for producing good students, good thinkers and good scientists''.
But Molleen Matsumura of the National Center for Science Education, a Berkeley, Calif.
, group that supports the teaching of evolution, said no one should downplay the changes made by the board.
``These are some of the most extensive changes I have seen,'' she said.
``There were paragraphs and paragraphs that were just removed''.
Some of the most important underlying concepts of evolution were removed, she said, and whether they will be taught will now be the option of local school districts.
``Trying to make it optional is like trying to make it optional to talk about gravity in a physics class,'' she said.
``The real losers are the children of Kansas''.
Evolution has been tested in enough states now to grab the attention of the national media, Matsumura said.
The media probably got interested in Kansas because the debate has dragged on for months, she said, and because even the governor came out in the foray, expressing opposition to the compromise.
The new standards could face a legal challenge from either the American Civil Liberties Union or Americans United for Separation of Church and State, a Washington group.
Both expressed their concerns to the board before the vote.
Also, the national science organizations that supported the writing committee's drafts want to take a close look at the changes the board has adopted, Staver said.
They want to make sure the standards don't attribute anything to them that they disagree with.
Holloway, the board chairman, said the board planned to consult with its attorney to see if the new standards would meet a legal challenge.
In the meantime, she said, the board will move forward with implementation.
The standards will be sent to all school districts, she said, and teachers will be trained in them.
At the same time, she said, assessments will be built for testing the new standards.
The standards are expected to take effect in the 2000-2001 school year.
Drawing on the deep resources of ``creation science'' advocacy groups, American fundamentalists are arming themselves with the latest books challenging details of Darwinian theory, getting elected to majority positions on school boards and learning ways to word curriculums so that creationism and evolution get equal respect.
While they have gotten very good at making a case for teaching alternative theories, a small group of scientists and educators stands in their way.
Most of America's children are not being taught that the world might have come into existence only 10,000 years ago, versus the nearly 4.5 billion years advocated by scientists, and this is largely because of the SWAT-like efforts of the National Center for Science Education.
The center, based in Berkeley, Calif.
, has four full-time employees and 4,000 members.
Within 24 hours of a call for help, Eugenie C.
Scott, the executive director, jumps into action.
Operating on a ``frayed, shoestring budget,'' the center can help mount a counterattack on creationism in public schools.
The center supplies concise articles and pamphlets refuting the claims of creation science, legal advice and summaries of court cases involving creationism, tips on writing letters to the editors of local newspapers, advice on how to explain issues to reporters, phone numbers of national experts on evolution, links to dozens of organizations that can offer help, and the phone numbers of other people in their state who are willing to get involved.
``They're the only group providing this kind of information for people who need it,'' said Dr.
Ronald Numbers, a professor of medical history and ethics at the University of Wisconsin in Madison and an expert on the creationist movement.
Since the center was founded in 1981, to provide a grass-roots response to creationist challenges, it has been active in all 50 states, Scott said.
Most fights over creationism vs.
evolution happen at the local level, in small towns in rural states where populations are fairly homogeneous.
``You don't see it in large cities where people come from diverse backgrounds,'' she said.
Dr. Ken Miller, a professor of biology at Brown University in Providence, R.I., likened the center to ``a national fire department''.
``Whenever the scientific integrity of biology teaching is under fire or compromised,'' he said, ``the center goes there to provide support and lend resources to people who are actually fighting the fire''.
Sometimes a creationist challenge can be ``nipped in the bud'' with just a few well-chosen maneuvers, Scott said.
For example, last year the school board in Post Falls, Idaho, at the behest of creationists in the community, wrote a policy statement that would have allowed creation scientists considerable latitude in making their views known in public schools.
The Center for Science Education, contacted by a member of the community, reviewed the statement and discovered that the school district was opening itself to a violation of the laws of church and state.
The suggestions made by the center kept the school district from running afoul of those laws, and the school curriculum did not change.
In other situations, creationists prevail.
A year ago a committee of educators in Kansas began a routine update of the state's science standards and called on the center for help on what they knew would be a delicate task.
The statewide committee of 27 science teachers, which submitted the new standards to the Kansas Board of Education, was stunned two weeks ago when the Board decided to drop evolution from the required state curriculum.
The battle to keep evolution in the classroom is a David vs.
Goliath struggle.
The Center for Science Education has an annual budget of $250,000, collected from members, compared with the $3 million of the Institute of Creation Research in Santee, Calif.
, one of several fundamentalist groups trying to discredit the teaching of evolution.
But Scott has a powerful slingshot in the form of clergy members who believe in evolution and scientists who believe in God.
When a local resident steps up before the microphone at a public hearing, says he a faithful Christian and also believes in evolution, people are mightily impressed.
According to several polls, including one reported recently in Scientific American, about 40 percent of scientists believe in God.
In local school board battles, members of the center will find such scientists in the community to testify.
Miller, for example, is both a scientist and Roman Catholic who has testified before numerous school boards on behalf of evolution.
``The fact that I'm a practicing Christian takes away their unspoken fear that everyone in science is either an atheist or agnostic,'' he said.
``I tell them why I believe evolution doesn't threaten the faith of young people''.
(STORY CAN END HERE.
OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS) Certainly, the Center for Science nettles advocates of creationism.
Duane Gish, senior vice president of the Institute for Creation Research, accused the center of intimidation and of ``always threatening to sue''.
``They are censors and bookburners,'' he said in a telephone interview.
``They were organized for the sole purpose of fighting creationists and to keep any evidence for creation science out of public schools''.
But, he acknowledged, ``They're effective''.
The face-offs have changed over the years as creationists have adjusted their tactics.
Early in this century, Scott said, creationists tried to ban the teaching of evolution and lost.
In 1987 the U.S.
Supreme Court struck down laws giving equal time to the teaching of creationism alongside evolution.
``Instead of fighting for equal time, they've decided to teach the evidence against evolution to balance it out,'' Scott said.
``If nothing else evolves, creationism does''.
These days, creationists have turned their attention to gaps in the fossil records and an older argument that life is so intricate and complex it could not have evolved by chance.
Their rubrics are intelligent-design theory, abrupt-appearance theory and irreducible complexity theory.
These new challenges against evolution are being made by conservative Christians at secular universities who are upset over the secularization of American society, Scott said.
They are not trying to ban evolution so much as to undermine it.
The Supreme Court ruled that teachers could teach secular and scientific alternatives to evolution, Scott said.
So the new battles in Kansas and elsewhere pit theory against theory _ intelligent design versus Darwin.
John Richard Schrock, director of biology education at Emporia State University in Kansas and a member of the committee that worked on the state's science standards, said the center had helped them be aware of how their choice of wording could open doors for intelligent-design theorists and other creationists.
``We had to remove ambiguity,'' he said.
``They helped us with our definition of evolution as theory,'' Schrock said.
They also helped change wording in a tolerance statement _ promoting respect for alternative views _ that would not open the door to teaching religious creationism in history classes.
In the end, the School Board ignored the committee's work and voted in its own viewpoints, Schrock said.
But Scott and her staff are continuing to fight back.
The American Civil Liberties Union may decide to bring a lawsuit against the Kansas School Board, Scott said, even as other pressures are put to bear on the state.
For example, one leading software company that is looking to expand took Topeka off its list.
``That gets peoples' attention,'' she said. &QL;
KANSAS CITY, Mo.
_ When Kansas Board of Education member Steve Abrams called John Staver to Topeka two weeks ago, Staver thought they were going to iron out some problems with proposed science standards.
Instead, Abrams gave Staver, who helped write the standards, a 91-page revision.
And although Abrams' version was written by ``various citizens,'' including the Missouri president of a creation science group, the only names on the revision are those of Staver and the 26 other members of the state committee that wrote the original document.
Abrams sees his revision as one of many since the committee began writing the standards more than a year ago.
But science committee members say Abrams' revision substantially changed a document that was based on guidelines from national science associations.
Abrams' version would change the definition of science, eliminate all but one reference to evolution and add a definition of creation as ``the idea that the design and complexity of the design of the cosmos requires an intelligent designer''.
``It bothers me that my name is on it,'' said Steve Case, a member of the standards committee who sits on the faculty at the University of Kansas.
The committee's standards list evolution as a cornerstone of science.
Without an understanding of evolution, students cannot succeed in the life sciences, the standards writers said.
But Abrams didn't agree, and on Wednesday he'll present his revision to the other board members.
Today, the board will hear public comment on the science standards.
The proposed standards are the result of a state board order in 1997 to spell out what students should learn at various grade levels.
The board and the state education commissioner appointed the 27-member committee to write the standards.
Staver, director of the Center for Science Education at Kansas State University, said the committee decided at its first meeting to base the new standards on national guidelines from the National Academy of Sciences.
Those national standards, developed over four years, were reviewed and critiqued by 22 science organizations.
About 18,000 persons signed off on the national standards before they were accepted, Staver said.
Those standards present evolution as a major component of science.
``That national consensus gives the national standards a very special kind of credibility,'' Staver said.
At least that's what the science committee thought.
But Abrams wasn't satisfied that the new state science standards represented the best kind of science.
Abrams, a veterinarian from Arkansas City, said science is something that is ``observable, measurable, repeatable and falsifiable''.
``It's been a standard for theories of science for hundreds of years,'' Abrams said.
``If it's not repeatable, it doesn't do any good''.
For Abrams, macro-evolution _ one species of animal changing into another as it adapts to its environment _ can't be observed, measured, repeated or falsified.
(Something that can be falsified can be proved or disproved by scientific experiment).
So when Cass County resident Tom Willis approached Abrams with a revision of the state standards, Abrams took a look.
Willis, president of the Creation Science Association for Mid-America, said he and about two dozen other people evaluated the proposed state science standards and found them lacking.
He declined to name his co-authors.
Willis said he and his co-authors couldn't present new standards to the state board; that's where Abrams came in.
When Abrams saw Willis' document, it was in its second draft.
Abrams said he helped the writers edit and present the document in the proper format.
Willis said the state committee's version and Abrams' revision are quite different, but Abrams describes the changes as slight.
Among the differences: - The committee's version lists five ``unifying concepts'' of science: systems, order and organization; evidence, models and explanation; constancy, change and measurement; form and function; and evolution and equilibrium.
Abrams' revision removed the unifying concepts and added three areas of science: technology, theoretical science and historical science.
- The committee's version defines science as ``the human activity of seeking natural explanations for what we observe in the world around us''.
In Abrams' revision, science is defined as something that can be repeated in the laboratory.
- The glossary of the committee's version defines evolution, in part, as ``a scientific theory that accounts for present day similarity and diversity among living organisms and changes in non-living entities over time''.
The glossary of Abrams' version describes evolution as permutations that occur within a species, with the caveat that some evolutionary changes can be demonstrated and some cannot.
The board that will take up the standards on Wednesday is divided along ideological lines, with five moderate members and five conservatives.
The two sides have deadlocked on several issues in the last few years.
Moderate member Janet Waugh of Kansas City, Kan.
, said she had no idea Abrams was working on a revision.
Neither did Bill Wagnon, a moderate from Topeka.
Wagnon said that after he received Abrams' version of the standards, the two talked.
Wagnon said he was trying to persuade Abrams to uphold the commitment he made two years ago when the science committee was appointed.
At that time, board members each chose a committee member to represent their views, with the rest appointed by the education commissioner.
If the board can't trust its own committees, the process fails, Wagnon said.
``Abrams is searching for a sixth vote,'' Wagnon said.
``I hope, if he can't find it, he will encourage others to vote for the committee's standards''.
Linda Holloway, a Shawnee conservative who is chairwoman of the state board, said she was unsure what would happen if state board members voted to accept Abrams' version over the science committee's standards.
The board is scheduled to vote in June on the new standards.
Scientific lessons about the origins of life have long been challenged in public schools, but some Bible literalists are now adding the reigning theory about the origin of the universe to their list of targets.
Nearly overlooked in the furor over the Kansas Board of Education's decision in August to remove evolution from its education standards was a decision on the much wider realm governed by the science of the cosmos.
Influenced by a handful of scientists whose literal faith in the Bible has helped persuade them that the universe is only a few thousand years old, the board deleted from its standards a description of the Big Bang theory of cosmic origins, the central organizing principle of modern astronomy and cosmology.
The Big Bang theory, based on decades of astronomical observations and physics research, suggests that the universe originated in a colossal explosion of matter and radiation some 15 billion years ago.
But ``young Earth creationists,'' as they are generally known, have come up with their own theories to explain how cosmic history could be condensed into mere thousands of years.
They are making this case in books, pamphlets and lectures, as well as on a number of Web sites.
Mainstream scientists consider their theories to be wildly out of line with reality, even though books describing them are often liberally sprinkled with references to authorities like Albert Einstein and Stephen Hawking.
As a result, physical scientists now find themselves in a fight in which they have seldom played a public role.
They have responded with a mixture of disdain, disbelief and consternation, and the reactions have not been limited to physicists and cosmologists in Kansas.
``It's the denial of what understanding we have of the origin of the universe in terms of modern science,'' said Jerome Friedman, a physicist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology who was awarded a Nobel Prize in 1990 for collaborating in the discovery of the subatomic particles called quarks and is the president of the American Physical Society.
``That's a terrible loss,'' Friedman said.
Hume A.
Feldman, a cosmologist at the University of Kansas in Lawrence who has worked at Princeton University and the Canadian Institute for Theoretical Astrophysics, called the matter ``frightening''.
``When I went into cosmology, I never thought I would get involved in anything like that,'' he said.
Feldman said that developments in his state bore a distant resemblance to the difficulties of political scientists under communist regimes in Eastern Europe, and that he feared that such pressures could impair the educational system.
But advocates of the creationist view say alarm over their theories is overblown.
Steve Abrams, a member of the Kansas board and veterinarian in Arkansas City who was among the leaders of the push to make the changes, said there are legitimate scientific doubts about whether the universe is more than several thousand years old.
``There is sufficient data to lend credibility to the idea that we do not have all the answers for teaching the origin of our universe,'' he said.
That sentiment was echoed by John W.
Bacon, a board member from Olathe who also voted with a narrow 6-4 majority for the changes.
``I can't understand what they're squealing about,'' Bacon said of scientists who oppose the board's action.
Millions or billions of years ago, Bacon said, ``I wasn't here, and neither were they.
Based on that, whatever explanation they may arrive at is a theory and it should be taught that way''.
Those objections closely mirror criticisms leveled at evolution by its opponents.
Alabama biology textbooks, for example, must carry a warning that reads in part: ``No one was present when life first appeared on earth.
Therefore, any statement about life's origins should be considered as theory, not fact''.
The Kansas challenge to the teaching of the Big Bang is not the first public objection to the theory on religious or political grounds.
Three years ago, the school superintendent of a conservative county in western Kentucky ordered two pages that explained the Big Bang in grade-school textbooks to be glued together.
The superintendent said that the Big Bang should not have been explained without including the Biblical version of creation as well.
The change in the Kansas standards does not preclude the teaching of mainstream biology, physics or cosmology, allowing teachers to present alternative viewpoints if they choose to do so.
But because the standards are used as the basis for state tests, the changes will probably have a practical effect on what is taught, said Dr.
Bill Wagnon, a professor of history at Washburn University in Topeka and a board member who voted in the minority.
Students' scores on those tests help determine whether a school receives accreditation from the state.
``The curriculum standards describe that process of what needs to be covered,'' Wagnon said.
So radical were the Kansas board's recommendations that it has been unable to publish its own standards, or even to display them on its Web site.
That is because the standards include long extracts from a book on education standards that was published by the National Research Council.
Because of its disapproval of the board's revised standards, the council has refused permission for them to be reprinted.
Beyond the expunging of evolution, the board also took out references to the hundreds of millions of years of Earth's geologic ages and modified sections on using the slow decay of radioactive elements to measure the ages of fossils and other rocks.
Among the most striking changes, however, was the removal of passages in the original standards dealing with the Big Bang.
Cosmologists see ample evidence for that explosion in the present expansion of the universe, in a diffuse afterglow in space called the cosmic background radiation, and in the precise abundances of light elements like hydrogen and helium that were left over from the cataclysm.
Cosmologists have also calculated the way in which stars, galaxies and clusters of galaxies coalesced from slight ripples in the primordial soup that emerged from the Big Bang.
To date, the results of those calculations match the increasingly precise observations of such structures in the heavens.
Of course, for all its success in accounting for observations, the Big Bang is indeed just a theory, although it is one with few scientific dissenters.
The biggest problem for the Young Earth Creationists is explaining the time that has apparently passed since the light we see from distant galaxies was emitted.
Given the constancy of the speed of light and estimates of the distance between Earth and faraway galaxies it is difficult to explain how Earth and the cosmos could be young.
But D.
Russell Humphreys, a nuclear weapons engineer at Sandia National Laboratory who is also an adjunct professor at the Institute for Creation Research near San Diego, thinks he has an answer.
In an interview, he said that Einstein's equations of relativity, the basis of the Big Bang theory, could be used to construct a universe in which the Earth is only a few thousand years old.
Abrams said that in thinking about the Kansas standards he had been struck by Humphreys' book, ``Starlight and Time: Solving the Puzzle of Distant Starlight in a Young Universe'' (Master Books, fifth printing in 1998).
Humphreys' ideas ``seem to be right there on the cutting edge, so to speak,'' Abrams said.
But most cosmologists say they are simply out of left field.
(STORY CAN END HERE.
OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS) nn The theory relies on a peculiar feature of Einstein's equations, which predict that powerful gravitational fields can speed the progress of time and, in effect, make clocks run at different rates in different places.
So Humphreys assumes that the Earth is close to the center of a structure related to a black hole, in which gravity is especially intense, that billions of years could pass in deep space while only a few thousand years went by on Earth.
Such a universe ``has clocks clicking at drastically different rates in different parts,'' Humphreys said in an interview.
Dr. Edward L.
Wright, vice chairman for astronomy at UCLA, said that there is no evidence the Earth is at the center of the universe, nor that such tremendous gravitational fields exist outside of ordinary black holes.
Moreover, said Wright, the acceleration of time would alter the vibrations of waves of light, shortening its wave length and turning it into deadly gamma rays.
Bombarded by such radiation, he said, ``the Earth would be sterilized''.
Humphreys, whose research in cosmology is unrelated to his work at the lab, said other features of his model would prevent the frequency increase.
Abrams also appealed to a theory that the speed of light was almost infinitely fast in the past, meaning that the light from extremely distant galaxies could have reached Earth quickly and would not be billions of years old.
He referred to writings on this subject by Dr.
Danny Faulkner, a professor of astronomy on the University of South Carolina's Lancaster campus and an adjunct professor at the Institute for Creation Science.
In a telephone interview, Faulkner cautioned that he had merely been describing ideas put forth by other scientists in the creationist movement and was not certain that the changing speed of light was correct.
Indeed, high-precision measurements of the speed of light and other crucial physical constants have revealed no detectable change in their values over recent time.
The debate over the age of the universe has exposed intense disagreements not just in schools but also among evangelical Christian.
``Often young-universe and old-universe creationists focus more energy on defending their respective positions than on reaching out to nonbelievers,'' wrote Dr.
Hugh Ross, a former radioastronomer who is an evangelical Christian, in ``Creation and Time: A Biblical and Scientific Perspective on the Creation-Date Controversy'' (NavPress, 1994).
Ross thinks that a literal reading of the Bible can be reconciled with the Big Bang, but says that his views are distinctly in the minority among evangelical Christians.
The six days of Genesis could stand for ``six consecutive long periods of time,'' Ross said.
The importance of the issue for many Bible literalists means that cosmologists could face the pressures that biologists have dealt with since John Scopes was convicted of violating a Tennessee law against the teaching of evolution in 1925, said Dr.
Eugenie C.
Scott, executive director of the National Center for Science Education, Inc.
, in El Cerrito, Calif.
``I don't think physical scientists are going to be immune to this,'' Dr.
Scott said.
``It would be very unwise for them to brush this off''. &QL;
WASHINGTON (AP) - In a new chapter of a dispute that pits science against religion, a national organization of scientists gives schools in 19 states unsatisfactory grades for teaching evolution.
The report, commissioned by the Thomas B.
Fordham Foundation and released Tuesday at the American Association for the Advancement of Science, grades 49 states and the District of Columbia on the basis of how well evolution is included in the state science education standards.
California, Connecticut, Indiana, New Jersey, North Carolina and Rhode Island received the highest rank.
Kansas, whose standards were described as ''disgraceful,'' got the lowest grade.
Following the six states graded at 100 were four states graded in the 90s and given A's in the report.
Fourteen states were graded at B, 7 got C, 6 were given D's and 13 flunked.
Iowa was not included because it has no statewide education standards, leaving that up to each local district.
Linda Holloway, former chairman of the Kansas State Board of Education, said the report was deceptive and ''very unfair''.
''Clearly they have an ax to grind about evolution,'' she said in a telephone interview.
Kansas last year rekindled the issue of teaching evolution in public schools when the state board of education, lead by Holloway, approved science teaching standards that minimized the importance of evolution and omitted the big-bang theory of the origin of the universe.
Other states have considered similar curriculum changes and some state legislatures have proposed laws that would forbid completely the teaching of evolution in public schools.
Evolution, a theory developed by Charles Darwin and others, holds that the Earth is billions of years old and that all life, including humans, evolved from simple forms through a process of natural selection.
Related to biological evolution is the concept that the universe began with a ''big bang'' and that only later were the sun and the planets formed.
Teaching of evolution has been opposed by people who believe that the universe, the Earth and its creatures were created abruptly by God.
Some proponents of divine creation have organized a concept, called creationism, that they proposed be taught along with evolution.
In 1987, the U.S.
Supreme Court barred states from requiring the teaching of creationism.
Now some of the same proponents support other concepts, such as ''abrupt appearance'' or ''intelligent design,'' that are linked to divine creation.
Lawrence S.
Lerner, who compiled the report for the Thomas B.
Fordham Foundation, said that the conflict ''is not really about science, but about religion and politics''.
He calls creationism ''a pseudoscientific rival to evolution that the courts have repeatedly held to be thinly veiled religion''.
Lerner, a former professor at California State University, Long Beach, said that Kansas got such a poor grade because its guidelines forbid teaching anything about the age of the Earth or the universe.
''There is not a reference to the age of the universe because it changes all the time,'' explained Holloway.
''Within a month after we adopted the standards, I heard three different ages of the Earth.
That is kind of ludicrous to get them (teachers) to stick to one age when it changes all the time''.
Lerner called the Kansas science education standards ''a disgraceful paean to antiscience''.
Holloway, however, said that the report was part of ''a campaign of deception'' and that all districts in Kansas are still teaching evolution.
''All we did was allow local groups to decide how they wanted to teach evolution,'' she said.
''That is a reasonable thing to do''.
Warren Nord, a member of a panel assembled by AAAS to comment on the report, spoke in favor of education standards that would include religious concepts of creation along with concepts of evolution.
But Nord, director of the Program on Humanities and Human Values at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, said the report failed to evaluate the completeness of science education.
''A good science education should not limit itself to what scientists think, but should also explore the cultural context in which scientific claims are made,'' said Nord, noting that the report ''doesn't address that''.
On the Net: Fordham Foundation: http://www.edexcellence.net AAAS: http://www.aaas.org/
NAZRAN, Russia (AP) --The war in Chechnya has simmered down to isolated clashes, but rebels said Monday they were regrouping for a new offensive and top Russian commanders warned that violence will flare up again.
Also Monday, in a sign of growing concern among Russians about the war, a group of lawmakers said they were setting up an independent commission to investigate the situation in Chechnya, including human rights.
Russia has been under strong criticism from the West over the eight-month war and United Nations High Commissioner of Human Rights Mary Robinson this month urged formation of an independent commission.
Pavel Krasheninnikov, a member of parliament and commission initiator, told a news conference that the Chechen offensive has reached a deadlock and ''a military settlement is unlikely to succeed''.
Chechen fighters have kept up their hit-and-run attacks on Russian forces in recent weeks, but the fierce battles that laid waste to the rebel republic have abated.
''They can no longer fight the way they did three or four months ago, but they have carried out, are carrying out and will carry out terrorist acts,'' said a top Russian commander in Chechnya, Col.
Gen. Gennady Troshev.
A rebel fighter, who only identified himself as Shirvani, said Monday the insurgents needed time to recover and regroup after the rough and bloody winter.
Shirvani came to Nazran in neighboring Ingushetia with 11 wounded militants for medical treatment.
He said the militants were planning ''a number of terrorist acts on the territory of Chechnya'' at the end of the month, but for the moment were concentrating on ''quick attacks'' on Russian checkpoints.
In the town of Gudermes, two Russian policemen were killed and three wounded Sunday when unknown gunmen opened fire on them as they raided an apartment where rebels were suspected of hiding out, the Interfax and ITAR-Tass news agencies reported.
The Russian military claimed that nearly a dozen rebels were killed and several taken prisoner during another battle in the southern Itum-Kale region, Interfax reported.
After moving into Chechnya in September, Russian troops seized about two-thirds of the republic in steady advances across the northern flatlands.
But the Russians have bogged down in the southern mountains, the last major area still under rebel control.
Moscow has indicated in recent weeks that it may be looking for a way out of the conflict.
The independent commission whose formation was announced Monday will investigate the events of the current war and of the 1994-6 Chechnya war, initiators said.
Putin, on a visit to London on Monday, said he only learned about the commission from media reports, but that he welcomed its creation.
MOSCOW, November 3 (Xinhua) --Russia is determined to liberate the entire breakaway republic of Chechnya and to restore normal life of the Chechen civilians, said Russian Defense Minister Igor Sergeyev on Wednesday.
"The liberation of Chechnya is the goal set for the federal armed forces.
President Boris Yeltsin is giving his whole-hearted backing to the anti-terrorist operation in Chechnya," Sergeyev said in Fergana, Uzbekistan.
According to the Interfax news agency, Sergeyev arrived in Uzbekistan Wednesday to analyze the performance of the Southern Commonwealth Shield-99 exercise, aimed at fighting large terrorist units with Russian, Kazakh, Kyrgyz, Tajik and Uzbek forces involved.
Sergeyev said that the Russian Eastern Army has surrounded Gudermes, Chechnya's second largest city, and there are very few militants remaining.
He believes that local volunteers will make the greatest contribution to the liberation of Gudermes.
Naurskaya, Shelkovskaya and Nadterechnaya districts are completely controlled by the federal troops, who have also taken control of seven of the 22 villages in the Gudermes district and nine of the 31 villages in the Grozny district, while the separatists are short of weaponry, munitions and medical supplies.
Sergeyev said the federal troops will soon surround the populated areas where the rebels congregate.
The rebels are retreating from the Gudermes and Sunzha districts to mountainous areas in Chechnya under attacks from the federal troops, said a source from the Russian Defense Ministry.
The source said foreign extremists and weaponry are arriving from abroad to aid the Chechen militants, with more than 300 terrorists coming from the Middle East in October, and by orders of field commander Shamil Basayev and Chechen President Aslan Maskhadov.
They have moved to the villages in the Itum-Kale, Nozhai-Yurt and Vedeno districts.
MOSCOW _ Russia's campaign against Islamic rebels in Chechnya moved closer to full-scale war Thursday as federal forces entered the breakaway Caucasus region where Moscow suffered a humiliating and costly defeat three years ago.
With Russian warplanes hammering targets in Chechnya for an eighth day, Prime Minister Vladimir Putin said an unspecified number of the estimated 20,000 to 30,000 Russian troops in the area had moved into positions inside Chechnya.
``Combat operations in Chechnya are already under &UR; &LR; way,'' Putin said in St.
Petersburg. Chechen leaders vowed to retaliate with attacks against Russian targets, and Russian military analysts predicted a new disaster along the lines of the 1994-96 war, which cost tens of thousands of lives.
Putin did not say exactly where the soldiers crossed into Chechnya and there were no reports of ground fighting, but tensions were running high.
Russian and Chechen sources said federal troops and tanks had advanced six to nine miles in the steppe north of Chechnya's capital of Grozny, then pulled back to about three miles inside the border.
Chechnya's Defense Minister Magomed Khambiyev said specially trained troops would retaliate for any Russian attack, news agencies here reported.
``Combat action will start on the territory of Russia,'' Khambiyev said.
``Russian citizens (will) feel the gruesome nature of the war, the bitterness of losing relatives and friends''.
Russia says it wants to wipe out Islamic militants who invaded neighboring Dagestan in August and September, inflicting heavy casualties on Russian troops before retreating back into Chechnya.
The militants also have been blamed for four recent bomb blasts in Russia that killed nearly 300 people.
Chechen President Aslan Maskhadov has been calling for talks to avert war but has been rebuffed by the Kremlin, which is demanding he turn over suspected terrorists.
Thursday, Maskhadov appealed to Georgian leader Eduard Shevardnadze to help set up talks with President Boris N.
Yeltsin. Russian generals have hinted that they plan to partition Chechnya and slowly push the rebel fighters into the mountains south of Grozny.
Colonel General Valery Manilov, seen as one of the main planners of the operation, said the fighting could be concluded by winter.
Military analysts questioned the wisdom of beginning a ground campaign so late in the year _ especially one that appears to have been hastily improvised.
``Military strategy says that you should never, ever, initiate a ground operation with winter approaching,'' said Alexander Zhilin, military analyst for the newspaper Moskovskiye Novosti.
``From a military point of view it makes no sense.
I am afraid that there are going to be massive casualties''.
Putin tried to play down the meaning of the Russian move into Chechnya, which Moscow sees as a part of Russia.
Since federal troops withdrew from the region in 1996, Chechnya has run its own affairs, although no country has acknowledged its claim to independence.
Putin and other Russian leaders now say that only by restoring control over the whole region can Russia prevent Chechnya from being a base for terrorist attacks.
``We have no border with Chechnya _ that is the Russian Federation and troop movements can take place there whenever necessary,'' Putin said.
``This is a very important question we must answer: Where do we want to create the security zone if we create one?
On our own territory?
And wait for them to come again to our villages. . . so that we would bomb our own people?
I don't think that's very useful''.
Putin, named by Yeltsin as the Kremlin's favored candidate in next year's presidential vote, has vowed to crush the rebels but avoid the mistakes of the last war.
Then, green Russian draftees were often thrown into battle situations where hardened Chechen guerrillas had nearly every advantage.
Federal warplanes and artillery bombed indiscriminately, turning even pro-Moscow Chechens into enemies.
The current campaign already shows similarities.
The Russian military says its warplanes are targeting rebel bases, but Chechnya's government accuses the Russians of indiscrimately hitting civilian targets.
The Chechens say 550 civilians have died in the raids, including 17 civilians Thursday.
Terrified civilians continue to pour out of Chechnya, and a line of vehicles stretched for miles outside of Grozny Thursday.
Already, 78,000 refugees have fled to Ingushetia, a tiny and impoverished Russian region west of Chechnya.
Some analysts said the Russian plan appears to be based on Putin's political goals, rather than military expediency.
``This is mass idiocy,'' said Pavel Felgenhauer, a Moscow-based defense analyst.
``I don't understand Russia's military strategy.
I am afraid that Russia is headed for a total military disaster.
I am really afraid.''
MOSCOW, October 15 (Xinhua) --Russian federal troops continued aerial and artillery attacks on rebel positions Friday in the breakaway republic of Chechnya as Moscow declared victory in the first stage of offensives against Islamic militants there.
Rebel command headquarters, bases and storage facilities near the villages of Zebir-yurt, Pervomaiskoye, Raduzhnoye and Dolinsky were targeted in the latest raids, the Interfax news agency reported, citing the press service of the Russian Defense Ministry.
In addition, a radio station of the Severny airport and a bridge near the village of Chishki were also destroyed, the press service said.
Federal troops "blocked off 23 villages in the Chechen districts of Shelkovsky, Naursky and Nadterechny," the service said.
The military campaign was launched following armed Chechen intrusions into the Daghestan republic and bomb blasts in four apartment buildings that killed some 300 people in Moscow and two other Russian cities.
Authorities believe Chechen rebels masterminded the terrorist attacks.
Viktor Kazantsev, the commander of federal troops in Chechnya, said Friday that the first stage of the counter-terrorist operation has been successfully completed and that federal troops have assumed control over one third of the Chechen territory.
"We created such circumstances that (militants) should expect us anywhere, any time.
This is what's happening now," he said.
The federal forces have fully seized the military initiative, Kazantsev said.
As the federal campaign against rebels continues, more refugees are flowing from Chechnya to other Russian regions nearby.
The Russian Ministry for Emergency Situations put the total number of Chechen refugees at over 156,000, Interfax said.
The situation is especially difficult in the tiny republic of Ingushetia where over 147,000 refugees are concentrated.
The Federal Migration Service says the number of refugees may eventually rise to 300,000.
Authorities are rushing tents, clothes, food, medicines and other humanitarian aid supplies to the refugees.
GROZNY, Russia (AP) --Russia opened several border crossings today with Chechnya, officials said, allowing terrified refugees to flee Russian air and rocket attacks after they had been blocked from leaving for days.
Officials opened border crossings at Stavropol, to the north of Chechnya, and at Dagestan, to the east of the breakaway republic, Russian news reports said.
At a third border crossing in the west, three bus loads of refugees, including children and some injured people, crossed from Chechnya into the neighboring Russian republic of Ingushetia, which has already taken some 170,000 refugees.
But no other vehicles were let through, and a line of cars and trucks crammed with refugees stretched for several miles on the Chechen side.
It was not clear why the Ingush border was not fully open.
``We are ready to let the refugees pass, but it is necessary to keep order,'' Col.
Arkady Krimsky said.
He said the border would be opened to refugees for six days and border-crossers would undergo several document checks.
All borders were closed last week, trapping up to 20,000 refugees trying to flee Chechnya.
Only six miles away from the Ingushetia border crossing, Russian artillery today heavily shelled the Chechen town of Bamut.
The town has been a prime target for weeks.
Russian jets and artillery also targeted the Chechen capital Grozny and several villages to the south today.
Russia used Grad rocket launchers and howitzers to hit some targets, said Igor Melnikov, a spokesman with the Russian armed forces.
Russian jets bombed a spring overnight near the village of Chernorechiye, killing 10 civilians, said Ruslan Magomedov, an aide to Chechen President Aslan Maskhadov.
Magomedov said civilians had come to the spring for drinking water since supplies were cut shortly after the fighting began.
Up to 200,000 people are thought to have fled Chechnya since Russia began its offensive in September.
Chechen leaders claim some 3,600 people, mostly civilians, have been killed in Russian attacks.
No independent confirmation is available, although medical workers have reported hundreds of civilian deaths.
Russian officials have said repeatedly that Chechen claims of civilian casualties are exaggerated.
Moscow has said it sent troops into Chechnya to crush the militants, who are also blamed for a series of deadly apartment explosions in September.
Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin said today that Russia did not intend to retake control of Chechnya by force, but wouldn't bargain with the militants either.
``We have no intention of conquering the republic and bringing its people to their knees,'' he said, according to the Interfax news agency.
Russia's goal is ``to destroy the terrorist stronghold in Chechnya and make (the republic's) revival possible''.
``We will never sit at a negotiating table with gangsters who have blood on their hands,'' Putin said.
Putin said Islamic militants, who twice invaded neighboring Dagestan from Chechnya this summer, were planning new attacks on chemical and nuclear power plants in Russia, as well as on Russia's transportation network.
Chechen Deputy Prime Minister Kazbek Makhashev said today that if Russia doesn't stop shelling Chechnya, the republic may be forced to launch ``retaliatory strikes'' in surrounding Russian regions.
Makhashev said he wasn't making a threat ``but a belated warning,'' according to Interfax.
GROZNY, Russia (AP) --Russia's air force pumped up the pressure on breakaway Chechnya on Saturday, knocking local television and radio off the air and sending tens of thousands of civilians fleeing toward neighboring regions.
It was the third day of punishing airstrikes on the capital, Grozny.
Russia's air campaign had been focused on bombing suspected rebel bases, but now it is targeting economic installations and civilian communications facilities as well.
Warplanes bombed the republic's television station in Grozny on Friday and early Saturday and damaged the equipment beyond repair, Russian media reported.
Chechen officials said seven people were killed and 24 wounded in the overnight air raid on the television station, the Interfax news agency reported.
The Russian military says it is trying to prevent incursions of Islamic militants from Chechnya into neighboring Dagestan.
The militants, who want to establish an independent Islamic state in southern Russia, entered Dagestan and fought Russian forces in August and September.
They have been linked to terrorist bombings that have killed 300 people in Moscow and other Russian cities this month.
Saturday's airstrikes also knocked out a radio tower in the village of Goyskoye, 12 miles southwest of Grozny, Chechen officials said.
Interfax reported that Chechnya's cellular communications station was also destroyed, but that report was not officially confirmed.
The air raids took out Grozny's oil refinery on Friday, and energy officials told Interfax that all refinery operations had come to a standstill Saturday.
The refinery was burning out of control, said Bekhan Islamov, head of the Grozny fire department, and a thick pall of smoke hung over the city.
``There are no means to stop the fire,'' Islamov said.
As Russia has shifted its air attacks from outlying villages to Grozny, tens of thousands of civilians have tried to leave the republic.
An estimated 100,000 Chechens crowded the border crossing between Chechnya and the neighboring Russian republic of Ingushetia on Saturday.
The line of cars and trucks waiting at the border stretched for miles.
Russian border guards only occasionally opened the crossing.
Ingush authorities said some 20,000 Chechens had sought refuge there by Saturday --most of them arriving by foot, crossing the border away from official checkpoints -- and that Ingushetia could not cope with the huge number.
``We are on the verge of a humanitarian disaster,'' said Akhmed Malsagov, the acting head of the Ingush government.
Russia's Air Force commander, Col.
Gen. Anatoly Kornukov, told reporters Saturday that Russian airstrikes beginning in early August had killed more than 2,000 militants and destroyed some 250 rebel strongholds and training centers in Chechnya and Dagestan.
Russia has put an estimated 13,000 troops along the breakaway republic's border with Dagestan.
The air raids and the concentration of Russian troops have fanned fears of a full-scale war in Chechnya.
Chechnya has run its own affairs since winning de facto independence in a war with Russia that ended in 1996.
But Moscow still claims it is a part of Russia and has struggled to keep violence from spreading to the rest of the Caucasus region.
Russian police have tried to seal the borders of Chechnya.
They detained two Russian converts to Islam who allegedly searched for sites for future terrorist bombings in Russia and were trying to re-enter Chechnya, Russian media reported Saturday.
The two admitted that they had been trained for sabotage at a camp run by Khattab, an Arab warlord based in Chechnya, the reports said.
They did not say when the men were detained.
Elsewhere, Georgian authorities denied Russian accusations that Chechen and Dagestani militants had used Georgian territory to cross into Chechnya.
MOSCOW, September 24 (Xinhua) --Federal fighter jets continued their bombing raids over the breakaway republic of Chechnya Friday, hitting oil tanks, refineries and radio and television transmission facilities near Grozny, the regional capital, Russian medial reports said.
Air force commander Anatoly Kornukov said federal aircraft will strike at Chechen guerrillas wherever they may be.
"The actions of Russia's air force are in compliance with a program approved by the General Staff of the Russian armed forces," the Interfax news agency quoted Kornukov as saying.
"Our main task is to rule out the possibility of new provocations on the (Chechnya's) administrative border with Daghestan, Ingushetia, and the Stavropol and Krasnodar territories.
We must not allow aggression to repeat," he said.
Islamic militants from Chechnya launched two waves of assaults on Daghestan since August.
Federal troops drove out the rebels at both times.
The rebel incursions and several terrorist explosions that claimed the lives of more than 300 people in several major Russian cities, including Moscow, have steeled the authorities' resolve to deal heavy blows to the militants in Chechnya.
"Strikes were inflicted on several oil refineries to disrupt the separatists' oil supplies and hamper their maneuvers in and outside Chechnya," Kornukov said.
Federal aircraft destroyed an An-2 plane and a radar station near Grozny's airport on Thursday.
The station "controlled airspace over Chechnya and was a source of increased danger for federal aviation," Kornukov said.
"We are resolutely minded and will be fulfilling the tasks facing us until we eliminate the guerrillas," he said.
Meanwhile, Aslan Maskhadov, president of the Chechen republic, has urged Moscow to stop the bombing raids and go to the negotiating table.
"A pending catastrophe in the North Caucasus can be averted and thousands of Russians and Chechens can be saved if Russia's leadership consents to resolve problems at the negotiating table by political methods," Interfax quoted Maskhadov as saying Friday.
He said the intensified air strikes against Chechnya are "a waste of effort, means and time" and that "it will all boil down to negotiations anyway".
Prime Minister Vladimir Putin, who was visiting Kazakhstan, said the federal bomb attacks would be made solely on terrorist bases.
"We will be after them everywhere.
If we track them in a lavatory, forgive me for saying so, we will do them in there," Interfax quoted Putin as saying.
MOSCOW, March 31 (Xinhua) --President Boris Yeltsin today announced that Russian forces would halt their offensive in rebel Chechnya from midnight (2000 GMT) today and start a partial withdrawal from some areas, but warned that Chechen separatist fighters would be hit hard if they stage "terrorist" attacks.
Yeltsin said in a nationwide televised address that the federal forces will withdraw stage-by-stage from "peaceful areas" to the Chechen border areas.
The initiative, approved by the Russian Security Council on March 15, is intended to end the 15-month fighting in the mountainous region of Chechnya and boost Yeltsin's chances of re-election in June.
He also made clear that some Russian forces would stay in Chechnya and respond to any attacks from the rebels.
"Of course we will not tolerate terrorist actions.
Responses to them will be adequate.
The security of Russian citizens must be strictly maintained," he said.
Free and democratic elections of parliamentary members will be held in Chechnya, Yeltsin said in the speech.
He said the main problem remaining is the status of the rebel republic and stressed that Chechnya must stay within the Russian Federation.
Yeltsin offered to resume talks with the separatist fighters through intermediaries.
Negotiations broke down amid mutual recriminations last December after a shaky ceasefire collapsed.
"The main condition under which negotiations on the status in Chechnya could be started is normalizing the situation in the republic and establishing peace, calm and stability there," Yeltsin said.
Meanwhile, the president said Russia may grant amnesty to combatants of Chechen separatist leader Dzhokhar Dudayev, but said it would exclude those who have committed grave war crimes.
Russia sent troops to the Caucasus region in December 1994 in a bid to crush the separatist drive led by Dudayev.
MOSCOW, October 19 (Xinhua) --Russian federal troops Tuesday continued air and artillery attacks on rebel positions in the breakaway republic of Chechnya, destroying some rebel bases and a communications relay station, the Defense Ministry said.
Meanwhile, federal forces continued to prepare weapons and equipment for combat use and were taking measures to improve coordination between units, the Interfax news agency quoted the ministry's press service as saying.
The Defense Ministry believes that Chechen rebels intend to let federal troops into Chechnya and then launch "large-scale retribution actions" while staging subversive and terrorist acts in the three Russian border regions of Daghestan, Stavropol and Krasnodar.
It said 60 rebels, among them people speaking Russian, have formed a unit to carry out terrorist acts in Russia.
The rebels, avoiding direct clashes with federal troops, have resorted to "guerrilla tactics".
Russian federal troops have so far secured control of one- third of Chechnya, with law and order being restored in the retaken areas, the ministry said.
Interfax reported that on Tuesday Moscow's envoy to Chechnya, Nikolai Koshman, and representatives of the Chechen community and of the 1996 Chechen parliament arrived in Mozdok to set up local governing bodies.
Russia launched the massive assault on the rebels following two waves of armed incursions into Daghestan led by Chechen warlords Shamil Basayev and Khattab, a Jordanian native known only by his last name.
The two have been accused of masterminding a series of terrorist explosions that killed about 300 people in Moscow and two other Russian cities.
In Grozny, capital city of the rebel province, a commander said Chechnya is ready to name the organizers of those terrorist acts and produce material and documented evidence to international organizations and the press, Interfax reported.
While urging Chechen authorities to hand over Basayev, Khattab and other suspected terrorists, Moscow has all along rejected any mediation from outside, saying the Chechen issue is its internal affair.
GROZNY, Russia (AP) --Russian forces pounded Chechen positions with an artillery barrage on several fronts today, and Russian authorities said they suspect Chechen militants will soon try to launch terrorist attacks.
Both the Russians and the Chechens have been fortifying fixed positions in recent days, but neither side has launched any major offensives.
The Russians have been relying mostly on their big artillery guns.
They were hammering two areas north of Chechnya's capital, Grozny, this morning.
The echo of the exploding shells could be heard throughout the city.
The Russians were also methodically shelling near the western town of Bamut, which has been under attack for several days.
The Russian Defense Ministry cited five regions in central, eastern and western Chechnya that were hit in artillery and air raids in the previous 24 hours.
The shelling was the latest development in a conflict that began this summer, when Chechnya-based Islamic militants invaded neighboring Dagestan twice with the aim of setting up an Islamic state.
They also are suspected in four Russian apartment bombings in September that killed about 300 people.
Russia responded to the attacks by sending troops into Chechnya two weeks ago, raising fears of another all-out war there.
During the first conflict in 1994-96, Chechnya fought Russian troops to a humiliating standstill.
It won effective independence for itself, but was left devastated and lawless.
Russian Defense Minister Igor Sergeyev said today that the Russian aim of establishing a security zone in Chechnya ``is close to completion''.
``The ultimate objective is not only to form the security zone, but to destroy armed gangs,'' he said while on a visit to Ukraine, Russian news agencies reported.
Government forces ``will not stop, but will carry on tasks to eliminate gangs and terrorist groups''.
Although Russian troops have held off mounting a ground attack on the capital, Russia has shown little inclination to negotiate an end to the fighting.
For now, the front line is largely defined by the Terek River, which flows across the northern third of Chechnya, forming a natural defense barrier.
The Russians control the sparsely populated plains to the north of the river, though the Chechens still hold a few positions.
The Chechens have most of the territory in the more heavily populated regions south of the river, though the Russians have made inroads in western Chechnya and have been massing forces along Chechnya's eastern border.
The Defense Ministry said that two of Chechnya's most prominent warlords, Salman Raduyev and Shamil Basayev, were both planning terrorist attacks inside Russia.
Raduyev intended to target Russian nuclear facilities, while Basayev was training women militants to carry out attacks in southern Russia, the ministry claimed, without citing any evidence.
More than 155,000 Chechens have fled since the fighting began, with most heading to Ingushetia, an impoverished region on Chechnya's western border.
Humanitarian aid has been slow in arriving, and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in Moscow said the next convoy of assistance was being delayed due to ``the very slow distribution of aid already delivered,'' the Interfax news agency reported.
The Emergency Situations Ministry said it was flying 52 tons of baby food, canned meat, sugar and other supplies into the region on Tuesday.
MOSCOW, March 25 (Xinhua) --Chechen rebels have been shooting at Russian federal military and police posts in Chechnya and at local polling stations set up for Sunday's presidential elections, the Interfax news agency reported Saturday.
On Friday, seven guerrillas attacked an Interior Ministry forces post in the Chechen capital Grozny, using rifles and grenade launchers, Interfax quoted military sources as saying.
There were no casualties among the Russians.
According to an unconfirmed report, a military post in the Argun district came under fire on Saturday, Interfax said.
"The clash went on for quite a long time," a military source was quoted as saying.
Another unconfirmed report said a Chechen vehicle had tried to break into Chechnya's second largest city, Gudermes.
The governor of the Russian-controlled Nadterechnaya district said Russian security and police forces carried out a special operation on Saturday and detained 11 suspects.
The governor, Akhmed Zavgayev, told Interfax he could not confirm a report that a bomb had been found in Znamenskoye, a district center.
Russian federal troops beefed up security in the breakaway republic in the run-up to Sunday's elections.
A travel ban was imposed from Friday through Monday to ward off possible rebel threats to stage terrorist attacks and sabotage.
The checking regime has been tightened; the protection of ballot stations strengthened and block stations at the entrances to villages reinforced, Interfax quoted military headquarters in the North Caucasus as saying on Friday.
Some 460,000 registered voters are expected to cast their ballots in 340 polling stations in 12 of Chechnya's districts.
Moscow launched a massive anti-terrorist military campaign in Chechnya in August last year after separatists invaded the neighboring Russian republic of Dagestan and allegedly carried out a series of apartment blasts in Moscow and two other Russian cities which claimed over 300 lives.
MOSCOW, July 6 (Xinhua) --Russia vowed Thursday to pursue the mopping-up operation in the volatile republic of Chechnya to an end and destroy all Chechen rebels refusing to lay down their weapons.
Russia's anti-terrorist operation in the North Caucasus "will be carried out to the end, and the hotbed of international terrorism will be wiped out.
Normal, peaceful life for this part of the Russian population... will be restored," Col.
Gen. Valery Manilov, deputy chief of Russia's general staff, told a news conference in Moscow Thursday, hours after President Vladimir Putin reprimanded officials for lax security in the war-torn region.
"There will be no parallels with the 1994-1996 Chechen war, there will be no repeat of that tragedy," Manilov said.
He noted that the most recent terrorist bomb attacks in a number of Chechen communities did not produce the results expected by their organizers.
The general said certain responsible individuals will be brought to court for not providing proper security, making the terrorist acts possible and leading to many deaths.
Putin had earlier made an unscheduled stop on his way back from a summit in Central Asia to hold late night talks Wednesday at a military base in Mozdok, just outside Chechnya.
The president issued televised warnings to contrite-looking officials and ministers who took turns to stand up as he spoke to them from behind a desk about the need to tighten security.
Manilov said there were fewer than 2,000 bandits remaining in parts of Chechnya's southern mountains not held by Moscow.
They used nighttime attacks to give the appearance that they exist throughout the war-ravaged republic.
Meanwhile, security measures have been indefinitely tightened up in some key Chechen cities and districts, such as in Chechnya's temporary capital city of Gudermes, Argun and the district center of Shali, 40 kilometers south of Grozny, he said.
GROZNY, Russia (AP) --Russian forces pounded Chechen positions with an artillery barrage on several fronts today, and Russian authorities said they suspect Chechen militants will soon try to launch terrorist attacks.
Both the Russians and the Chechens have been fortifying fixed positions in recent days, but neither side has launched any major offensives.
The Russians have been relying mostly on their big artillery guns.
They were hammering two areas north of Chechnya's capital, Grozny, this morning.
The echo of the exploding shells could be heard throughout the city.
The Russians were also methodically shelling near the western town of Bamut, which has been under attack for several days.
The Russian Defense Ministry cited five regions in central, eastern and western Chechnya that were hit in artillery and air raids in the previous 24 hours.
The shelling was the latest development in a conflict that began this summer, when Chechnya-based Islamic militants invaded neighboring Dagestan twice with the aim of setting up an Islamic state.
They also are suspected in four Russian apartment bombings in September that killed about 300 people.
Russia responded to the attacks by sending troops into Chechnya two weeks ago, raising fears of another all-out war there.
During the first conflict in 1994-96, Chechnya fought Russian troops to a humiliating standstill.
It won effective independence for itself, but was left devastated and lawless.
Russian Defense Minister Igor Sergeyev said today that the Russian aim of establishing a security zone in Chechnya ``is close to completion''.
``The ultimate objective is not only to form the security zone, but to destroy armed gangs,'' he said while on a visit to Ukraine, Russian news agencies reported.
Government forces ``will not stop, but will carry on tasks to eliminate gangs and terrorist groups''.
Although Russian troops have held off mounting a ground attack on the capital, Russia has shown little inclination to negotiate an end to the fighting.
For now, the front line is largely defined by the Terek River, which flows across the northern third of Chechnya, forming a natural defense barrier.
The Russians control the sparsely populated plains to the north of the river, though the Chechens still hold a few positions.
The Chechens have most of the territory in the more heavily populated regions south of the river, though the Russians have made inroads in western Chechnya and have been massing forces along Chechnya's eastern border.
The Defense Ministry said that two of Chechnya's most prominent warlords, Salman Raduyev and Shamil Basayev, were both planning terrorist attacks inside Russia.
Raduyev intended to target Russian nuclear facilities, while Basayev was training women militants to carry out attacks in southern Russia, the ministry claimed, without citing any evidence.
More than 155,000 Chechens have fled since the fighting began, with most heading to Ingushetia, an impoverished region on Chechnya's western border.
Humanitarian aid has been slow in arriving, and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in Moscow said the next convoy of assistance was being delayed due to ``the very slow distribution of aid already delivered,'' the Interfax news agency reported.
The Emergency Situations Ministry said it was flying 52 tons of baby food, canned meat, sugar and other supplies into the region on Tuesday.
MOSCOW, July 5 (Xinhua) --By Wednesday, Russia have detained more than 200 people in Chechnya and its neighboring republic of Dagestan on suspicions of involving in the terrorist blasts Sunday night, which caused over 100 person casualties to Russian troops.
About 50 persons have been detained in the breakaway republic of Chechnya, eight of whom may have taken part in the suicide bombing in the city of Argun, 10 kilometers southeast of the Chechen capital of Grozny, Russian presidential aide Sergei Yastrzhembsky on Chechnya told an interview in Moscow Wednesday.
He confirmed that the federal forces had possessed information that rebels were preparing more terrorist attacks.
Meanwhile, 168 Chechens were detained in a large-scale police operation in the town of Khasavyurt in Dagestan Tuesday, the Interfax news agency cited the Dagestani Interior Ministry press service as saying Wednesday.
The center said the suspects' identities and affiliation with rebel units are being verified.
Yastrzhembsky said he does not expect any end to federal operations in Chechnya in one or two months, since "the long survival and resistance of the bands' leaders exert a moral, psychological and political influence on part of the Chechen population".
"As long as those men, such as Basayev, Khattab, Barayev, remain at large, we can expect a stealthy attack at any time," he said, adding that neutralizing these men is the main purpose of the current federal special operations.
According to the military's data, the rebels continue to recruit replacements from local populations and still have some 1, 500-2000 fighters, said Yastrzhembsky.
MOSCOW, July 4 (Xinhua) --Russia imposed a curfew in Chechnya Tuesday night and is conducting a full-scale manhunt throughout the breakaway republic after several terrorist blasts shocking the country Sunday night.
All the federal units stationed in Chechnya have been put on red alert.
Additional checkpoints have been set up and control over motor transport has been intensified, as rebels conducted suicide attacks by using trucks filled with explosives, Interfax cited the headquarters of Russian forces in the North Caucasus as saying Tuesday.
Meanwhile, about 30 people have been detained in Chechnya on the suspicion of involving in the terrorist act in Argun, which killed more than 20 Russian servicemen, Itar-Tass quoted Russian prosecutor in Chechnya Vladimir Kravchenko as saying Tuesday.
"Sufficient evidence has been collected against some of the suspects," he said.
"After the names of those who carried out the terrorist acts are established, the organizers of the crime will be found," he said.
He believed that the terrorist acts were organized by the same well-known rebel warlords --Khattab, Basayev and others.
The curfew will be tightened up on the whole territory of the roily republic from 21:00 to 7:00.
Residents were warned not to go out and motor transport is prohibited during curfew.
"Moving cars will be fired at without any warning," the headquarters said in an announcement.
MOSCOW, October 17 (Xinhua) --Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin said Sunday that federal troops would try to avoid unnecessary loss of life in its campaign to root out Islamic gunmen from the breakaway republic of Chechnya.
"We will not undertake the tactics of a large-scale military action with tank attacks and the storming of towns,'' Putin told RTR state television.
Despite reports of fire exchanges near the village of Bamut, about 70 kilometers southwest of Grozny, the Chechen capital, Russian authorities have kept tight-lipped about the clashes.
Military officials denied their troops had moved any closer to Grozny.
They also declined to comment on an Interfax news agency report that troops had bombed a cement plant 25 kilometers south of Grozny.
At the completion of the first stage of its campaign against Chechen rebels, federal forces have now taken control a third of Chechnya, mostly low-lying areas north of the Terek River.
They have also secured key points in western and eastern parts of Chechnya in their drive to form a "security zone" around the rebel republic.
Speaking in the southern Russian town of Vladikavkaz, Viktor Kazantsev, commander of Russian forces in North Caucasus region that includes Chechnya, said there was no order to take Grozny.
Russian leaders have not ruled out storming the capital, although they say they want to avoid a repeat of the ill-fated war in 1994-96 in which tens of thousands were killed.
Kazantsev said the Interior Ministry is to play the key role in the second phase of the anti-terrorist operation in Chechnya, Interfax reported.
He said that the federal grouping "has not carried out a single strike against peaceful villages".
Rather, the rebels carried out strikes on villages for provocative purposes, picturing them as federal strikes.
"All of these cases are being tackled by the military prosecutor's office," Kazantsev said.
Kazantsev said he believed talks with Chechnya's relatively moderate leader Aslan Maskhadov were possible, but not in the coming days.
Maskhadov has repeatedly called for talks with Moscow, but Putin says he must first hand over guerrilla leaders like Shamil Basayev and Arab-born Khattab.
Putin blames the fighters for a series of terrorist bomb blasts in Russia that killed some 300 people.
As they suffer major losses following the federal offensive, Chechen rebels are planning more terrorist acts in Russia, Interfax quoted the Interior Ministry and the Federal Security Service as saying Sunday in a communique.
The document said that the Russian law-enforcement bodies "are taking every measure to prevent such terrorist operations".
In Grozny, Chechen leader Aslan Maskhadov claimed Sunday that the Russian military conceal their losses in Chechnya.
He told a news conference that more than 1,500 soldiers and officers had been killed, four planes and 10 helicopters had been downed, and 62 armored vehicles had been put out of action so far, Interfax reported.
The Chechen side only lost 32 men, Maskhadov said.
Russian commanders claim that the Chechen rebels' casualties, by most conservative estimates, are at least 1,500.
Moscow has denied such claims and Colonel General Ilya Panin, chief of the Defense Ministry's Main Personnel Department, said that since the start of fighting on the territory of Chechnya, federal forces have lost 47 servicemen.
MOSCOW, May 3 (Xinhua) --Russian federal forces continued air raids on rebel positions in Chechnya Wednesday as restrictions were imposed in the breakaway republic to prevent rebel attacks during the May holidays.
Su-24 assault planes and Su-24 bombers flew 10 sorties over the past 24 hours, targeting mountain trails in southern Chechnya to block rebel routes and rebel positions in mountain forests in the south and southeast regions.
Meanwhile, Mi-24 helicopter gunships took off 30 times to provide air support for ground troops.
Amid mounting incidence of rebel attacks, the federal command has restricted the movement of citizens across the republic during the May holidays to prevent subversive and terrorist acts, Interfax reported.
The movement of motor columns has been banned from May 1 to 11, the headquarters of the combined federal grouping said.
The situation in Chechnya remains complicated and federal checkpoints have come under attacks for five to eight times over the past 24 hours.
"The rebels operate in mobile groups consisting of five to 15 members, and carry out sorties to populated areas and to the flatland," Interfax quoted the headquarters as saying.
In another development, three policemen were killed Tuesday when their car came under fire on the Argun-Kizlyar motorway.
The three were sent to Chechnya from Novorossiisk, Interfax said, quoting the Interior Ministry's Department for Chechnya.
MOSCOW, July 20 (Xinhua) --The Russian combined federal force in the breakaway republic of Chechnya has seen 25 people killed and 74 wounded in the past week, a top defense official said Thursday.
The casualties included eight Defense Ministry servicemen and 17 policemen from the Interior Ministry, according to Col.
General Valery Manilov, first deputy chief of the General Staff.
As of July 20, the federal troops have lost 2,518 killed with 7, 956 wounded since the start of the anti-terrorist operation in the North Caucasus on August 2, 1999, the Interfax news agency reported.
In the course of the combat actions in Chechnya that began on October 1, 1999, the federal force have registered 2,240 people killed and 6,372 wounded.
Amid reports of mounting attacks on federal positions, Interior Minister Vladimir Rushailo and Chechnya's civil administration chief Akhmad Kadyrov have agreed to increase the number of Interior servicemen from 1,900 to 8,000 in the near future, Interfax reported.
"This is a necessary measure," said Col.
General Ivan Golubev, Russian deputy interior minister and commander of the Interior Ministry's force in the North Caucasus.
MOSCOW, February 28 (Xinhua) --Russian Interior Minister Anatoly Kulikov said Friday the government is tightening security on the border with Chechnya, to guard against possible terrorist attacks.
Kulikov told Interfax news agency that the interior ministry had put important targets under heavy guard in light of statements from the rebel commanders that they would continue the war against Moscow.
He said the eastern border would be closed to bandits but the ministry would not send more troops to reinforce the region.
Chechen rebel commanders, Salman Raduyev and Shamil Basayev, Thursday threatened to attack Russian targets.
They said they would launch terrorist activities, involving 5,000 people, against Russia until Moscow recognized the independence of Chechnya.
The Chechen interior ministry has set up a special department to investigate kidnappings, the Itar-Tass news agency reported Friday.
Newly elected President of Chechnya, Aslan Maskhadov, ordered that kidnappers be sentenced to death or life imprisonment.
Armed Chechen rebels have detained hundreds of Russian hostages in return for heavy ransoms or the release of imprisoned Chechen criminals.
MOSCOW (AP) _ Russia began military exercises in the Caucasus region on Monday in an effort to ease increasing violence in its restive southern republics of Chechnya and Dagestan, a news agency reported.
The exercises follow President Boris Yeltsin's recent overtures of support for Chechnya's government and his decision to have Prime Minister Sergei Kiriyenko resume negotiations with the president of the secessionist republic.
The military maneuvers, which run until Friday, are designed to tighten coordination between various forces to fight terrorist attacks, free hostages, and combat smuggling _ exactly the sort of incidents on the rise in Russia's fringe republics.
``Measures aiming to maintain law and public order in the region should be comprehensive and carried out according to a single plan,'' said Russian Interior Minister Sergei Stepashin, according to the ITAR-Tass news agency.
Stepashin said the exercises ``do not mean that somebody is preparing for some massive combat action''.
Chechnya and Dagestan have been plagued by a rise in kidnappings, killings, and theft.
Maskhadov, who declared a state of emergency in Chechnya last month, narrowly escaped a car bomb on Thursday that killed two of his bodyguards.
Forces taking part in the exercises include the Interior Ministry, the Border Guard Service, the Federal Security Service, and troops stationed around Stavropol, 1,200 kilometers (750 miles) south of Moscow.
Yeltsin ordered Kiriyenko to meet this week with Maskhadov to demonstrate support for his government, even though the Chechen president led a 1994-96 war for independence from Russia that ended in political deadlock.
``The simple fact of this meeting is very important,'' Ivan Rybkin, Russia's top negotiator with the Chechens, told the Interfax news agency.
``After a long break, negotiations between Moscow and Grozny will occur at a high level.
In that period, many bitter problems have accumulated that can be destroyed only by the leaders of Russia and Chechnya''.
Four top Russian politicians demanded on Monday that Russia clarify its stance on Chechnya in light of increased violence in the region, including the hostage-taking of Russia's presidential envoy to Chechnya, Valentin Vlasov, almost three months ago.
Former Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin, former national security chief Alexander Lebed, Tatarstan region President Mintimer Shaimiyev and Boris Berezovsky, executive secretary of the Commonwealth of Independent States, demanded in a statement that the Russian government ``immediately formulate a position on the Chechen republic and the North Caucuses...
and consistently implement it,'' news agencies said.
Though Maskhadov said he favored new negotiations, he blamed Russia for Chechnya's present situation.
Maskhadov also ruled out any compromise on the republic's independence, repeating that Chechnya would never sign a document ``which might limit Chechnya's independence even by one percent,'' he told the Interfax news agency.
Six people have been arrested so far in connection with the car bomb attack on Maskhadov, but by Monday afternoon three were released, the Interfax news agency said.
One of the people being held is an elderly man whose apartment was used by gunmen during the attack, Interfax said. (nw/mr/ls)
MOSCOW, July 3 (Xinhua) --The latest report shows that the casualties of the Russian joint troops in Chechnya in a series of terrorist blasts made by Chechen rebels Sunday night have reached over 100, said the Russian Interior Ministry on Monday.
Up till now, 38 soldiers were killed, 76 wounded and 25 missing in the blasts, the Itar-Tass quoted the ministry's interior agency in the troubled republic as saying.
At least 31 people died in a military hostel explosion in the city of Argun overnight.
Rescuers have recovered 26 bodies of the Russian special policemen (OMON units) from the rubble of the police dormitory Monday afternoon, said the agency.
The blast in Argun also killed three civilians who were staying near the building.
Now ruins-clearing work is still underway and more corpses will be found, it said.
Chechen rebels have staged a fresh wave of terrorists acts since Russian troops launched a large-scale mopping-up campaign against the militants in late June, especially after federal units annihilated a 200-250 strong gang of Arab mercenaries near central Chechen village of Serzhen-Yurt last week.
Russian presidential aide on Chechnya Sergei Yastrzhembsky told journalists Monday that separatists had become more active in the turbulent republic and the number of terrorist acts had considerably risen.
He noted that 100-more militants had been recently killed in a five-day battle near Serzhen-Yurt, where the rebels had been rallying to deal strikes at Argun and the second largest Chechen city of Gudermes.
The terrorists aim to make strikes at important populated localities in Chechnya in a bid to show their combat potential, and they also planned to kill some prominent representatives of the federal authorities and military command, said the Kremlin senior official.
He believes that the terrorist acts are also designed to intimidate the Chechen population and to challenge the newly appointed head of interim federal administration in Chechnya, Akhmad Kadyrov.
Moscow says it has eliminated most rebels in Chechnya after a nine-month bloody war and now it is fighting remnant terrorists, responsible for a series of bomb blasts in the capital and other Russian cities among other acts of violence.
The rebels have vowed to fight a guerrilla-style war against the Russians and have launched an increasing number of hit-and-run attacks --a tactic which helped drive Russian troops from the province in the 1994-1996 Chechen war.
In recent weeks, Russian forces have suffered increasing losses from rebel ambushes and booby traps planted on highways.
Russian official figures put total federal losses at more than 2,300 since troops repelled an incursion by Chechen rebels into the neighboring republic of Dagestan last August, ahead of the full-scale military campaign.
In early June, Kremlin said that despite decades of thousands of rebels were wiped out, there were still 2,000-2,500 remnants staying in Chechnya and engaged in guerrilla warfare, ambushes and terrorist acts.
MOSCOW, July 3 (Xinhua) --Chechen rebels committed five terrorist blasts in several key cities of the war-torn republic Sunday night, killing at least 36 Russian servicemen and wounding 74, Russian presidential aide on Chechnya Sergei Yastrzhembsky announced.
According to Interfax, Russian federal forces have blocked roads leading to the city of Argun and prepared for a "mopping up" operation after a violent apartment bloc explosion by the terrorists killed at least 25 and wounded 81 there overnight.
Aslan Maskhadov, the leader of the Chechen separatists, issued Monday a tough statement to Russian authorities and the military, but Yastrzhembsky said it's "nothing new".
Maskhadov demands that "airstrikes and artillery attacks be stopped," and that "the troops subsequently be completely withdrawn from Chechnya" and "the military commanders, who have been directing operations in Chechnya, be put on international trial".
The separatist leader also said that if the Russian authorities present evidence showing that Chechen people have something to do with the bombings of apartment houses in Moscow, Volgodonsk, and Buynaksk, he is prepared to hand over the suspects to the courts " under the control of international organizations".
Maskhadov's address does not contain anything new, Yastrzhembsky reiterated.
"I can only repeat that any negotiations with Maskhadov are possible only on the issues of surrender and stopping resistance."
MOSCOW, July 3 (Xinhua) --Preliminary reports indicate that 36 Russian servicemen were killed and another 74 injured in five terrorist attacks in Chechnya on Sunday, Russian presidential aide on Chechnya Sergei Yastrzhembsky announced here Monday.
All the attacks "had one and the same signature, one and the same scheme, with heavy 'Ural' trucks and suicide bomber drivers," he said.
All were targeted at military commandant buildings, Russian forces positions, "landmark houses on territory of Chechnya".
Three explosions hit Gudermes, the fourth in Urus-Martan while Argun saw the worst attack, Yastrzhembsky said.
There was no final information as to the death toll available as of 12:30 p.m., Moscow time (0930 GMT) Monday.
Rescue work continues, and the picture may become clear by the end of the day, he said.
Yastrzhembsky refused to confirm the report of the Chechen prosecutors about the death of 50 people in Argun.
MOSCOW, May 12 (Xinhua) --Three people were killed and 18 others injured in a bus explosion near the Chechen village of Dzhaglarbi on Friday, the Itar-Tass news agency reported.
The blast occurred at 9:35 a.m.
Moscow time (0535 GMT) when an apparently radio-controlled land mine went off on the bus full of passengers, Tass quoted a Russian government representative in Chechnya as saying.
The wounded have been sent to local hospitals while the bodies of the dead have been taken to the village of Kurchalloi.
The official said rebels in the breakaway republic of Chechnya planned such blasts against armored personnel carriers of federal troops.
Also on Friday, assailants bombed a federal police car, wounding two officers sent to Chechnya from Kirov.
The Russian military said two men who bombed a Gudermes-Kadi- Yurt train and four people suspected of killing police officers in the Shelkovskaya district earlier in May have been caught.
Meanwhile, it warned of more possible terrorist attacks by Chechen rebels, saying that the rebels have changed their tactics and are planning a series of bombing operations in the republic.
MOSCOW, December 15 (Xinhua) --Russia plans to end its anti- terrorist operations in the breakaway republic of Chechnya by the end of February next year, said a top Russian military official Wednesday.
It will "take another two to three months" to eliminate the militants in Chechnya, said General Valery Manilov, first deputy chief of the Russian Armed Forces' General Staff, at a meeting with foreign military attaches at the General Staff Academy.
He said about 12,000 to 15,000 militants have remained in Chechnya, including some 2000 terrorists and bandits backed by foreign extremists, adding that "this terrorist army will have to be eliminated unless the bandits surrender and lay down their arms.
" Manilov said the federal troops would liberate Grozny, capital of Chechnya, and he promised that "no massive attacks or storming of Grozny will be launched while even one civilian remains".
Now the Russian troops control over 60 percent of Chechnya's territory in which about 90 percent of the Chechen population were living.
"A total of 120 Chechen villages have been cleared of militant formations.
Particularly the flat territory of Chechnya has been completely freed of bandits and terrorists," Manilov said.
The militants are fortifying their positions in sparsely populated mountainous and semi-mountainous areas, he said.
Earlier, the Russian troops freed the second biggest Chechen city of Gudermes and three other key Chechen towns of Argun, Urus- Martan and Shali, completing the surrounding of Grozny.
Russia began its military operations in Chechnya in late September after Chechen rebels' armed incursions into the neighboring republic of Dagestan and a spate of apartment building blasts that claimed over 300 people in Moscow and two other Russian cities.
The Russian authorities blamed Chechen extremists for planning and carrying out terrorist acts.
NEWPORT NAVAL STATION, R.I.
_ The EgyptAir flight that crashed on Oct.
31 went into an extreme dive, making the passengers weightless and pitching the nose down at a 40-degree angle, before the nose pulled back up and subjected the plane and its passengers to two and a half times the normal force of gravity, the chairman of the National Transportation Safety Board said Friday night.
Experts said many of the details released Friday might reflect an airplane that was in an emergency, but still under control.
But the chairman, James E.
Hall, said that the information from the flight data recorder also showed that both engines had been switched off from the cockpit.
Pilots experienced with the Boeing 767, the type of plane that crashed, said they could not understand why the engines had been turned off, with the information now in hand.
Hall also said that the elevators, the adjustable surfaces on the horizontal tail that are used to raise or lower the nose, moved to uneven positions.
It is not possible for the crew to command such a movement on the 767, according to pilots, and the fact that the elevators moved out of unison indicates a major malfunction.
But it was not clear from the information released so far whether this was a cause of the accident or a malfunction along the way.
The crash, about 60 miles from Nantucket, Mass.
, killed all 217 people on board.
Other than a small quantity of debris and human remains, searchers have not recovered anything except one of the two ``black boxes,'' the flight data recorder, which they are still analyzing.
``Obviously, these data raise many questions,'' Hall said.
``I can assure you they have raised questions in the minds of the NTSB and the investigators.
We cannot at this time explain the circumstances that were occurring on Flight 990 that resulted in the flight profile I have just described, and we will not attempt to speculate about it''.
But, he added, the second ``black box,'' the cockpit voice recorder, might explain the circumstances.
The Navy believes it has located that device on the sea floor, within a pile of wreckage from the plane, but a robot submarine was still trying to retrieve it Friday.
For law enforcement authorities, Friday's information raised questions that deepened the mystery of EgyptAir even as it yielded few clues to guide the inquiry into whether anyone might intentionally have interfered with the flight or tried to bring down the aircraft.
The officials said that in the course of their investigation they had examined the recent activities, background, medical history and emotional stability of the crew members and passengers.
But so far, the officials said, those inquiries had not provided useful information.
Overall, the officials said that while the FBI inquiry was far from over, investigators were faced with dwindling leads and, increasingly frustrated over their inability to help explain the crash, were anxiously awaiting recovery of the cockpit voice recorder.
(STORY CAN END HERE.
OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS) nn
WASHINGTON _ Saying that the EgyptAir crash may never be fully understood from the black boxes and the wreckage, the National Transportation Safety Board said Tuesday evening that all planes should have cockpit video recorders, and that the power switches for the cameras, as well as the voice and data recorders, should be moved to where the crews cannot reach them.
The board voted unanimously to recommend to the Federal Aviation Administration that recorders holding two hours of video be required in all new planes beginning in 2003, and be installed in older planes by 2005.
It said the planes should have enough cameras in each cockpit to see all the cockpit screens and other displays, and all actions by the crews in working the controls Pilot unions oppose cameras as a violation of their workplace privacy.
The Safety Board said, though, that it would treat the video images just as it treats the cockpit voice recorder tapes, playing them only for investigators.
The board cited several crashes where cockpit images would have been helpful, including two brought down by smoke or fire, Valujet 592, a DC-9 that crashed in the Everglades on May 11, 1996, and Swissair Flight 111, an MD-11 that crashed off Halifax, Nova Scotia, on Sept.
2, 1998.
But in Egyptair 990, which crashed on Oct.
31, 1999, as the board delicately put it, ``questions still remain as to the exact environment in the cockpit prior to the upset''.
Publicly, the board has said only that investigators believe that the crash may have been a deliberate act, but its own investigators, and those of other Federal agencies, believe that the plunge from an uneventful cruise fight, which killed all 217 people aboard the Boeing 767, may have been a suicide by the relief co-pilot.
WASHINGTON, November 16 (Xinhua) --The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) of the United States is taking over the investigation of the crash of EgyptAir 990 from the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), officials said Tuesday.
Investigators doubt that the plane crash, which resulted in the death of all 217 aboard, may have been caused by a criminal act.
Preliminary investigation found that someone in the cockpit uttered a prayer before the jet's autopilot disengaged and the plane started its fatal plunge.
Under the U.S. rules, the NTSB is in charge of the investigation of air transportation accidents while the FBI has jurisdiction over destruction of an aircraft and crimes committed aboard an aircraft.
If investigators conclude the plane was brought down by foul play, they will try to determine whether the perpetrator was assisted by a terrorist group in a suicide plot or acted alone because of a personal problem, the source close to the probe said.
The Cairo-bound passenger plane crashed into the Atlantic Ocean off the Massachusettes coast 40 minutes after takeoff from the Kennedy International Airport in New York on October 31.
The cockpit voice recorder was recovered from the ocean floor by a remote-operated robot Saturday after a two-week search.
Speculation about a possible hijacking, crew fight or pilot suicide has lingered because the flight data recorder shows that the plane's autopilot was turned off, the aircraft put into a dive, the throttles cut back and the engines shut off.
NEWPORT NAVAL STATION, R.I.
_ A submarine operated by remote control retrieved a flight data recorder from the depths of the ocean south of Nantucket on Tuesday, bringing to the surface a crucial piece of evidence that investigators hope will reveal why EgyptAir Flight 990 crashed into the sea.
The container that held the recorder, known as a black box, showed signs of damage when it was recovered, but the flight recorder inside seemed to have survived the jetliner's catastrophic impact and nine days of submersion in salt water, investigators said.
``The magnetic tape was removed from its protective casing, cleaned and dried,'' James E.
Hall, chairman of the National Transportation Safety Board, said Tuesday night after investigators in Washington began evaluating the recorder's condition.
``The tape has data on it, and NTSB engineers are currently working to extract information''.
The recovery of the box, and the condition of its contents, appears to have provided the first breaks in what has been a frustrating case.
For much of the past week, investigators and mourning families have waited as foul weather and winds caused delays in the search for the recorders.
Preliminary radar data has shown that the plane fell precipitously, and three lobstermen reported hearing a strange rumble where the plane slammed into the ocean's surface.
But until the recovery of the data recorder on Tuesday, virtually no other information had been available.
EgyptAir's pilots reported no trouble over their radios before or during the dive, and the wreckage recovered to date has revealed little more than that the great airplane _ a Boeing 767 with a wingspan of 156 feet and a length of 176 feet _ was reduced to bits when it struck the sea.
The crash killed all 217 passengers and crewmen.
Hall said the retrieval of the first recorder _ another, the cockpit voice recorder, remains missing on the sea floor _ could provide key insights into the crash.
``In any investigation, the most important information comes from the recorders,'' Hall said.
``They can save several steps in the investigatory process''.
The cockpit voice recorder is designed to preserve conversations among the pilots and ambient sound in the cockpit, including the noise from plane alarms, its two engines, or any obvious mechanical problems.
The flight data recorder is designed to record more than 150 categories of information that shows how the plane was flying, how the pilots were handling it and how the aircraft's systems were operating.
Hall said he hopes the recorder ``will paint a picture of what this airplane was doing in its last minutes, and seconds, before this tragedy occurred''.
The black box was discovered before dawn in 245 feet of water by the Deep Drone, a robot submarine that was deployed and controlled from the Grapple, a Navy salvage ship.
The Deep Drone had resumed searching after a more capable robot, known as Magnum and deployed from the submarine support vessel Carolyn Chouest, damaged its fiber optic cable on undersea wreckage.
Within hours of lifting the black box aboard the Grapple, the Navy flew it by helicopter to Andrews Air Force Base in Maryland, where it was transferred to Washington.
Agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, who are treating all debris recovered from the aircraft as potential criminal evidence even though the investigation has turned up no indication that the plane was brought down by a crime or terrorism, accompanied the recorder on its trip.
The Navy, working in moderate seas of 5 to 7 feet, planned to continue searching for the remaining black box through the night and into Wednesday morning.
Retrieving the second recorder is important because in some past jetliner accidents, information from the two flight recorders, together, has provided a level of detail that has enabled investigators to pinpoint causes.
For example, when an Aeroperu Boeing 757 crashed soon after takeoff from Lima in 1996, the cockpit voice recorder captured the desperate conversation of the two pilots.
``Everything has gone, all the instruments went to (expletive),'' the captain said, as the plane dropped into the Pacific.
The flight data recorder later revealed that the instrumentation problem was with three small vents on the side of the plane, known as static ports, which are used to measure air pressure and determine air speed.
The static ports are crucial because speed cannot be determined visually from a jet flying at high altitude at night, and if a plane flies too fast or too slow, it will crash.
Investigators, zeroing in on the static ports after reviewing the two flight recorders, eventually found that maintenance workers had covered the 757's static ports with protective masking tape when they washed the plane, and had neglected to remove it _ an oversight that meant the pilots could not read their airspeed from the instruments and flew the plane to its doom.
In some cases, however, flight recorders have proved insufficient.
In the crash of SwissAir Flight 111 off the coast of Nova Scotia last year, the recorders have provided no insight into the source of smoke in the cockpit that the pilots described to air traffic controllers on the ground.
WASHINGTON _ Investigators, aided by several Arabic interpreters, pored over the cockpit voice recorder of EgyptAir Flight 990 Monday to try to determine whether a criminal act caused the plane to crash two weeks ago killing all 217 people on board.
``We are concentrating our efforts on determining from the evidence whether this investigation is to remain under the leadership of the National Transportation Safety Board,'' James E.
Hall, the board's chairman, said in a briefing here.
A high-ranking government source said Monday that Hall and FBI director Louis Freeh had been talking with White House officials in recent days about which agency should head the investigation.
The NTSB would remain the lead agency in the investigation if the cause of the Oct.
31 crash of the Boeing 767-300ER is found to be mechanical or pilot error.
But if a criminal act _ either terrorism or a willful decision by one or more members of the flight crew _ brought down the plane then the FBI would take over.
The source said a decision on whether the FBI should assume control of the investigation could come within days.
The crash, which occurred about 60 miles south of Nantucket, has quickly become one of the most mysterious accidents in aviation history.
Everything seemed normal 30 minutes into the flight from New York's John F.
Kennedy International Airport to Cairo when the plane's autopilot was switched off and it suddenly went into a ``controlled descent'': a controlled steep dive from 33,000 feet to about 16,700 feet.
At that point electrical power to the plane apparently ceased because the transponder, which sends information to radar, and the flight data recorder, which monitors some 155 functions as well as the plane's performace, stopped working.
The plane's two engines _ the source of much of the electrical power on board the aircraft _ were turned off from the cockpit shutdown, a scenario that puzzled commercial airline pilots and aviation specialists.
When this type of aircraft is in flight it can continue to generate electricity even if the engines stop working, said a veteran Boeing 767 pilot, who said he was mystified as to a possible cause.
After descending to 16,700 feet, the plane climbed to about 24,000 feet then went into a final dive and started breaking up before slamming into the Altantic Ocean.
Despite the puzzling final minutes of the flight and the lack of any clear-cut cause emerging from the first analyses of the two black boxes _ the flight data and cockpit voice recorders _ Hall was optimistic that the cause would eventually be pinpointed.
``Because of the quality of the cockpit voice recorder and extensive information on the flight data recorder, I am confident many of the questions that we have, that you have and that the world has, will be answered,'' Hall said.
He said the cockpit voice recorder is ``almost entirely in a foreign language'' and the NTSB has added translators to assist in interpreting the phrases, noise, even the grunts from crew members as the plane went on a terrifying roller coaster ride.
``As painstaking a process as it is to read out cockpit voice recorders, this one is made more difficult,'' Hall said.
Because investigators were translating the conversations and synchronizing information on the flight data recorder and the cockpit voice recorder to help determine a possible cause, Hall said he was ``not prepared to answer questions on the contents of the cockpit voice recorder''.
One aviation specialist, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said the NTSB _ which was asked by the Egyptian government shortly after the crash to overseee the investigation _ is likely under pressure not to blame the airline or its employees.
``The only things that I can think of at this point are a criminal act or massive flight crew error,'' the specialist said.
``And this crew was the best that EgyptAir has.
I am sure the airline does not want to hear that it was a massive error on their part''.
Another aviation specialist, familiar with major accident investigations, agreed, saying Hall's comment about which agency should lead the inquiry ``was a politically required statement''.
Some investigators are expected to visit Boeing headquarters in Seattle this week to use information from the flight data recorder on Boeing's 767 simulator to try to find out what happened on board the 10-year-old airplane.
On Sunday, Hall said he would meet with Navy officials and family members this week to discuss how to proceed with the recovery of the remains of crash victims and wreckage from the plane.
Hall, who knew two people who perished in the 1996 ValuJet crash in the Florida Everglades, said he has advised relatives of Flight 990's victims to be prepared for the news that no remains would ever be found.
``That is something that may or may not happen, but they need to be aware of my previous experience in an accident of this force and magnitude,'' Hall said.
Meanwhile, a Rhode Island judge Monday cleared the way for death certificates to be issued to relatives of those who died in the crash.
The certificates will state that each victim is presumed dead, even if their remains have not been found and identified.
&QL; (Ann Scales and Thomas Farragher of the Globe staff contributed to this report.)
CAIRO, November 2 (Xinhua) --A delegation of Egyptian aviation officials and experts, and family members of the Egyptian victims of an EgyptAir plane crash flew Tuesday to the United States.
The delegation, led by EgyptAir Chairman Mohamed Fahim Rayan, included representatives of the Egyptian national carrier and the Civil Aviation Authority, the country's Middle East News Agency reported.
Aboard the same plane were 73 family members of the Egyptian victims of the EgyptAir flight 990, a Boeing 767, which crashed into the Atlantic Ocean off the northeastern coast of the U.S. shortly after taking off from John F.
Kennedy International Airport on the way to Cairo early Sunday.
The 217 people on board, including 15 crew members and 62 Egyptian passengers, are all feared dead.
The Egyptian family members will later fly from Yew York to the Rhode Island to identify the bodies of their kins provided that they are recovered from the sea, the news agency said.
The rescue operations for survivors black box and debris within the next 15 hours, said the chairman.
The Egyptian officials and experts, who will follow up the U.S. investigations, carries files pertaining to the history of the Boeing 767 ever since its purchase in 1989 and its maintenance records, Rayan said.
He expected the investigations to take time, pending the recovery of various parts of the plane, reassembly of them and the determination of the cause of the crash.
So far, Egyptian and U.S. leaders and officials have ruled out the possibility that a terrorist act led to the tragedy.
But they, however, also cautioned that it is premature to jump to conclusions.
WASHINGTON (AP) --An EgyptAir pilot seeking asylum in England who says he has information about October's deadly crash of EgyptAir Flight 990 will be interviewed by U.S. accident investigators.
National Transportation Safety Board Chairman Jim Hall, whose agency is investigating the crash that killed 217 people off the coast of Massachusetts, announced the decision Tuesday to send two staffers to London.
He did not elaborate.
EgyptAir pilot Hamdi Hanafi Taha sought asylum last week after landing a plane at London's Heathrow Airport.
Airline officials say Taha has no special knowledge about the cause of the Oct.
31 crash near the island of Nantucket.
Neither American nor Egyptian investigators have released any official findings on the cause of the crash of the Boeing 767.
Some U.S. sources have speculated the plane's co-pilot, who died in the crash, deliberately brought the jet down.
Egyptian authorities hotly dispute that theory.
They say the most likely cause is an unexplained problem in the plane's tail section.
Hitchcock would have had a field day with this one.
The demise of EgyptAir 990 is shaping up as one of the great whodunits in the annals of aviation disasters.
That is why Americans have plunged into this terrifying tale, discussing it last week as they gathered around fax machines and dinner tables at a pitch not seen after the TWS and Swissair crashes.
Why the intensity?
Primarily because authorities have introduced the possibility that a human _ not some mechanical failure _ caused the crash.
But the story also generates such heat because supporters and opponents of this view offer equally compelling arguments defending their respective cases.
Tension forged from competing versions of events crackle through the story.
Either the National Transportation Safety Board or the Egyptian government is utterly wrong about what happened in the skies off of Nantucket early in the morning of October 31.
The stakes are high.
Egypt is America's best friend in the Mideast.
Its reputation is at stake.
So is ours.
As dramas go, you can't do much better than that.
Neither the TWA nor Swissair crash carried this kind of torque, notwithstanding the early charges of a missile attack on the TWA plane that have been long since discredited.
Here, in contrast, the NTSB raises the specter of a villain lurking in the cockpit _ malignant flesh and blood prepared to commit suicide and kill 217 souls with malice aforethought.
This macabre vision is further infused by the rampant fears in the West of terrorists committing horrific acts in the name of Islam.
And terrorism is indeed another possible explanation for the crash.
There were over 30 Egyptian military officers on the flight, including three brigadier generals.
According to one NTRB source quoted early in the investigation, the presence of this critical mass of military elite immediately raised questions of foul play.
Under that theoretical line of reasoning, if co-pilot Gamil El Batouty really did cause the crash, he could have done so for political rather than personal reasons.
The EgyptAir 990 story is also personal in a way that TWA and Swissair were not.
We know the name of the man who may _ and it's only ``may;'' we don't know anything for sure yet _ have intentionally put the Boeing 767 into its fatal dive.
There has been massive media coverage of his family.
We have learned that a daughter has lupus and, according to a son, the father was bringing automobile tires he purchased in the U.S back to Egypt with him.
We have even seen his Cairo apartment, and heard his wife describe their close relationship.
If he is the culprit, al-Batouti will be an infamous one _ not another shadowy killer who goes down with the plane or somehow slips into Afghanistan.
The ``criminal act'' scenario is the worst nightmare of every flier who has ever harbored doubts about the guys in the cockpit, any cockpit.
How many of us will stare long and hard at our flight crew the next time we board the New York shuttle?
Is the pilot having a bad day, we wonder?
If nothing else, this plane crash has buttressed the notion that just because you're paranoid doesn't mean they're not out to get you.
United States diplomats have been concerned about the speed with which the NTSB has floated the idea that El Batouty or another pilot may have sent the plane into a suicide plunge.
So has Frank Wisner, Jr.
, a former ambassador to Egypt and luminary of our foreign policy establishment, who cautions against the suicide theory.
The NTSB is couching its statements with conditional verbs as the case becomes increasingly sensitive.
Still, we don't know how to assess the significance of what El-Batouty said _ or is believed to have said _ in Arabic before the plane began its precipitous dive.
Dueling experts fight over meaning, and authorities dutifuly nod to ``cultural differences''.
Are our experts right or did they miss subleties that Egyptian experts will detect?
Americans who care about US relations with Egypt in particular, and the Arab world in general, know that our government has to get this right.
The rest of us must probe the Egyptian charge that the American media has rushed to judgment in condemning a senior pilot of their national airline.
Are the Cairenes right here, or are they experiencing a national case of denial?
Their cause was not helped by an Eyptian government official who told CNN that there is a ``triangle of death'' over the Atlantic that swallowed TWA, Swissair, JFK Jr.
and now EgyptAir.
Such fantasies rob this investigation of the objectivity it deserves.
For now, Americans lean toward the NTSB suicide theory because we find the NTSB investigators credible.
They are, after all, our investigators.
Besides, there appears to be no hint of mechanical error.
Given the stunning developments that have already appeared, though, we are prepared for more precipitous plot changes in this yarn.
They could materialize in the findings of an exhaustive US-Egyptian review of the voice recorder to be completed this weekend.
In the meantime, we remain glued to this story that gnaws at us.
&QL; (Sam Allis is the Globe's Sunday writer.)
CAIRO, September 16 (Xinhua) --Egyptian Minister of Transport and Civil Aviation Ibrahim el-Demiri said on Saturday that he did not rule out the possibility that EgyptAir Flight 990 was downed last year by electromagnetic interference.
Electromagnetic waves could have confused the computer of the Boeing 767, leading to the crash of the plane, el-Demiri said.
EgyptAir Flight 990 crashed into the Atlantic off the United States coast shortly after taking off from New York airport on October 31, killing all 217 people on board.
Egyptian and U.S. investigators released a factual report last month without giving the cause of the incident.
The Egyptian minister, who was commenting on a report in the New York Review of Books magazine, said, however, the theory was speculative, Egypt's Middle East News Agency reported.
The U.S. magazine's report said that electromagnetic interferences by military radars in the area, over which the EgyptAir plane was flying, could have caused the sudden shutdown of its computerized auto pilot, the elevators and engines.
El-Demiri said Egypt is still demanding the U.S. to release additional information on the plane's elevators, which controls the nose up or down, and to publish radar images, which the U.S. withheld for reasons of classified military data and might give clues to the tragic incident.
WASHINGTON (AP) --Public release of reports compiling the facts in the EgyptAir Flight 990 crash is a routine step, but one likely to fan the international dispute over what caused the tragedy last fall off the New England coast.
U.S. investigators have suggested that a co-pilot of the jetliner may have deliberately plunged the plane into the sea, killing all 217 people aboard on Oct.
31. That idea has been vehemently rejected by Egyptian officials, who contend that mechanical failure is the probable cause, or possibly even a bomb or missile.
The new reports from the National Transportation Safety Board, being released Friday, compile the findings of investigators in such areas as human performance, aircraft structure, power plants, maintenance, air traffic control and so forth.
But they do not single out a particular cause of the crash and do not include any analysis.
The probable result will be each side finding evidence to support its contention as the investigation continues into the reason the Boeing 767 plunged into the sea off the coast of the Massachusetts island of Nantucket.
Investigators have said that the cockpit voice recorder contained words that may have been a prayer just before the plane went into its plunge.
That led to speculation that co-pilot Gameel El-Batouty may have deliberately crashed the plane.
El-Batouty had been investigated by a New York hotel's security staff for a number of incidents that allegedly included exposing himself, USA Today reported in its Friday editions, quoting sources it did not name.
The allegations were contained in FBI investigative reports into the backgrounds of the plane's crew members, and some of the reports were expected to be released Friday, the sources told the newspaper.
However, investigators could not determine whether El-Batouty's behavior at the hotel had any connection with the crash, the newspaper said.
In Cairo, El-Batouty's family angrily denounced the published allegations.
''They are running out of things to say, so they are ruining the guy's reputation,'' Walid El-Batouty, the co-pilot's nephew, told The Associated Press.
''They are trying to raise anything to divert people from the real reason (for the crash)''.
An air traffic control recording released earlier showed no radio transmissions from Flight 990 to controllers or other aircraft in the final minutes before the plane crashed.
The last word was a routine ''good morning'' signoff.
NTSB Chairman Jim Hall has testified before Congress that the movements of the plane were ''consistent with a deliberate action on the part of one of the crew members''.
Also, information from the flight data recorder released early in the investigation showed the plane's autopilot was switched off before it was put into a steep dive.
Both engines on the Boeing 767 were also turned off.
Rejecting that theory, families of the crew members have filed suit against the plane's manufacturer, Boeing.
Egyptian officials have focused on possible problems with the plane's elevators, a pair of small wing-like surfaces at the tail of the jet that control the up-or-down angle of the nose.
The flight data show the plane's elevators were uneven during the rapid descent, indicating a major problem.
The elevators are designed to operate in unison.
Investigators are trying to determine if the split was caused by the plane's breakup, a jamming problem in one of the elevators, crew panic or even a struggle for control by two people in the cockpit.
The last contact with the flight came at 1:47 a.m.
EST. The pilot's last words after being asked to switch to another radio frequency: ''One-two-five-nine-two, good day,'' followed by an unintelligible utterance, then, ''Nine-nine-zero heavy, good morning''.
The heavy referred to his big aircraft, a Boeing 767.
The first indication that something was wrong came seven minutes later.
The New York air traffic controller said, ''EgyptAir 990, radar contact lost, recycle transponder squawk one-seven-one-two''.
It was a declaration that the plane no longer appeared on radar screens and a request for it to send out a signal.
But that and several other efforts failed to get a response.
The FAA estimates that the plane hit the water at about 1:51 a.m., four minutes after its last transmission.
The investigation also prompted a dispute over who is responsible for paying for the costly investigation, which has included recovering most of the crash plane from the seafloor.
Egypt gave the United States $5 million in June to help pay for the search and rescue efforts.
That country's share of the cost was expected to be $10.6 million and officials promised to pay the balance expeditiously.
----- On the Net: National Transportation Safety Board: http://www.ntsb.gov EgyptAir: http://www.egyptair.com.eg
NEW YORK, November 10 (Xinhua) --U.S. investigators on Wednesday are continuing the search for the cockpit voice recorder from the ocean depths where the Boeing 767-300 on EgyptAir Flight 990 crashed October 31.
The plane's flight data recorder, one of the two "Black Boxes", was retrieved early Tuesday and now is under analysis by experts of U.S.
National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) in Washington.
The recorder's tape contains parameters measuring air speed, altitude, settings of engines and many other data, valuable to investigators to determine the cause of the accident which killed all 217 on Board.
The Cairo-bound plane plunged some 60 miles south off Nantucket Island, Massachusetts soon after it took off from New York.
Investigators still wonder whether it was a result of mechanical defects, operational errors or human sabotage.
Two remotely operated vehicles containing sophisticated robots were used to catch the data recoder from depths of more than 70 meters.
WASHINGTON (AP) --National Transportation Safety Board Chairman Jim Hall said Friday that additional studies must be completed before his agency can determine the cause of the EgyptAir 990 crash, and he disputed an Associated Press report that investigators are increasingly convinced the jet was crashed deliberately.
Three government officials close to the investigation, speaking on condition of anonymity, said examinations of the jet's remains have revealed no signs of a mechanical failure that would have caused the plane to crash, AP reported Thursday.
``No hypothesis for the cause of this accident has been accepted,'' Hall said Friday in a statement.
``There is much that still needs to be done before a determination of cause can be reached''.
The AP story did not report that any hypothesis had been officially adopted by the safety agency.
One official told AP that the Boeing 767 showed no signs of mechanical problems and that ``it was doing what it was supposed to,'' before the crash.
Asked about Hall's statement, the official said Friday night that he stood by his original account.
Two other officials said the working theory remains the plane was sent into a dive shortly after takeoff from New York's Kennedy Airport.
Attempts to contact those two officials Friday night for comment on Hall's statement were not successful.
Hall said the NTSB and the Egyptian Civil Aviation Authority had agreed this week to continue studying the accident, including the voice and data recorders.
The investigators will be examining the plane's elevator system, hydraulic components and engine pylons, he said.
They also plan to conduct flight simulations at Boeing facilities in Seattle.
``No decision has been reached at this point as to whether further wreckage recovery will ultimately be necessary,'' Hall said.
``Both agencies agree that additional work needs to be accomplished before a final decision can be made''.
About 70 percent of the plane's wreckage was recovered from the ocean floor, following the jet's plunge off the Massachusetts island of Nantucket on Oct.
31. The jet crashed 40 minutes into its 11-hour flight, killing all 217 aboard.
Cruising at 33,000 feet, EgyptAir Flight 990 was ``uneventful'' until the plane's autopilot disconnected about 8 seconds before the jetliner, with 217 people aboard, began to drop down toward the Atlantic Ocean, crash investigators said Wednesday.
It is not yet clear whether the autopilot disconnected by itself or was turned off by the crew of the Cairo-bound jet that was some 40 minutes out of New York's Kennedy Airport at the time.
National Transportation Safety Board Chairman Jim Hall, releasing the first tidbits of information that his investigators have gleaned from examining one of the jet's two black boxes, said the Boeing 767 made what appears to be a ``controlled descent'' from 33,000 feet down to 19,000 feet.
The flight data recorder stopped shortly afterward and the final five to 10 seconds of information on its tape are still being analyzed, Hall told a news conference at the safety board's headquarters in Washington, D.C.
All aboard the jet died when it crashed into the Atlantic less than two minutes after the autopilot disconnected..
Although the information made public so far raises still more questions about what could have gone wrong on Flight 990, Hall did say investigators do not believe the jet's thrust reversers deployed in flight.
One of the thrust reversers on the twin-engine 767, which are used to slow a jet after landing, had been deactivated because of a problem before the jet left Cairo for New York, and there has been speculation that perhaps a thrust reverser deployed during flight.
That speculation was fueled because another 767 crashed in Thailand in 1991 when a thrust reverser deployed in flight.
The Lauda Air crash killed all 223 people on board.
``There is no evidence of thrust reverser deployment in the data we have,'' Hall said of EgyptAir Flight 990.
The safety board is expected to release more information from the flight data recorder over the coming days.
The Navy is still trying to recover the second black box _ the cockpit voice recorder.
It would have recorded crew conversations in the jet's cockpit during the final 30 minutes of flight, and could prove to be even more important than the flight data recorder in helping investigators determine the cause of the crash.
A former 767 pilot told the Seattle Post-Intelligencer last night the jet may have experienced an in-flight electrical or computer problem, based on the limited amount of information made public so far by the safety board.
The autopilot on a 767 would disconnect from flying the airplane if there there were a problem with the cockpit computers or the plane's electrical system, said Dan Gellert of Sequim, a former pilot with Eastern Airlines who later trained 767 pilots.
A light would flash and an alarm would sound to let the crew know immediately that the autopilot was off, he said.
The 767 has a modern ``glass cockpit,'' and information about the plane, including its altitude and attitude (or angle of flight), are displayed on screens in front of the crew.
An electrical or computer problem would cause those screens to go blank, or could even result in erroneous flight data to be displayed, Gellert said.
The pilots, believing they were still in level flight, could have put the big jet into a dive, he theorized.
An electrical problem would also explain why the plane's transponder stopped working, he said.
The transponder sends out an electronic signal that tells air traffic controllers the plane's altitude.
Until Wednesday, the only information about what happened to EgyptAir Flight 990 had come from an analysis of radar data by the NTSB and the Air Force.
Safety board investigators said last week the radar analysis showed the jet, flying at 33,000 feet, suddenly entered a steep but straight dive down to 16,700 feet.
At that point, air traffic controllers lost contact with the plane's transponder.
But Air Force radar continued to plot the plane's course and altitude down to 16,000 feet.
The jet climbed back to 24,000 feet before making a rapid descent to 10,000 feet.
At that point, radar showed multiple targets, indicating the plane broke up before it hit the ocean.
The transponder operates on a separate electrical buss, or pathway, from the plane's computers and autopilot, Gellert said.
That would explain why it kept working longer, assuming an electrical problem caused the autopilot to disconnect.
Based on preliminary analysis, investigators had said last week that early in its 17,000-foot dive, the plane may have exceeded the speed of sound, though it began to slow as it neared 16,000 feet.
But Hall said Wednesday the flight data recorder indicates the plane did not reach such speeds.
Even so, the 767 did dive much faster than it would have in an emergency.
Based on the radar analysis, the jet took 40 second to reach 16,700 feet, which would have meant it was going down at more than 24,000 feet per minute.
A Boeing spokesman said the recommended emergency descent rate for the 767 is 8,000 feet per minute.
An emergency descent, for example, might be used if the plane suddenly lost cabin pressure and pilots needed to get to a lower altitude as fast as possible.
Gellert said pilots are trained to bank a commercial jetliner about 30 degree before making an emergency descent.
That is to keep the passengers from flying out of their seats in a steep dive.
Centrifugal force during the turn presses passengers into their seats.
Investigators have said the radar data shows the plane did not turn in its initial dive.
Neither the pilot nor co-pilot of EgyptAir Flight 990 radioed any kind of distress call to air traffic controllers.
Their last contact with controllers a few minutes before the plane began its descent did not indicate any problem.
Gellert said an electrical problem could have knocked out communications, or the crew might have been preoccupied trying to regain control of their airplane.
Hall did not comment Wednesday on how the airplane behaved after the brief climb shown by radar data, or in its final plunge to the ocean.
That subsequent climb is consistent with a loss of the computers, Gellert said.
``Somewhere along the way you realize you are diving, then you try and recover,'' he said.
``Perhaps the crew overcorrected.
Now they are zooming back up, putting the plane on its tail.
Then they lose control again and head down and start shedding parts.''
NEWPORT, R.I.
_ The mystery of what happened to EgyptAir Flight deepened Wednesday with the stunning word from investigators that new radar data shows the plane climbed 8,000 feet back into the night sky after it had plunged more than three miles from its cruising altitude at near supersonic speeds.
The bizarre roller-coaster flight path would suggest the crew was attempting to control the plane as it climbed, though investigators refused to speculate on that.
The Boeing 767 climbed back to 24,000 feet, only to dive again rapidly toward the Atlantic, this time breaking up when it reached about 10,000 feet.
Radar showed what were probably pieces of the airplane drifting down in the direction of the wind for another 2 minutes and 40 seconds before dropping off radar scopes.
All 217 people aboard the plane were killed.
At a late-night news briefing here Wednesday, investigators with the National Transportation Safety Board said they need to study data from the jet's two black boxes to try and piece together the mystery.
But it could be next week before those boxes are recovered from nearly 300 feet on the bottom of the Atlantic off Nantucket Island.
A storm that is churning up 22-foot waves in the crash area has halted most of the recovery operations, though a few pieces of surface debris was collected Wednesday, including spoiler panels on the wing, seat cushions, a main wheel, the nose tire and five passenger emergency slides.
High winds and rough seas are expected to continue through the weekend, said Navy Capt.
Burt March.
The Navy has said it needs seas of no more than about eight feet before they can send out the USS Grapple.
That ship is the same one that used its highly specialized equipment to recover the recover wreckage of TWA Flight 800 in 1996 and Swiss Air Flight 111 last year.
Until they have the black boxes, the lack of information will continue to frustrate investigators.
Veteran aerospace journalists who have covered many crashes said they could not recall a commercial airliner acting as strangely as Flight 990 as it made its final wayward journey up and down over the Atlantic some 30 minutes after taking off from Kennedy Airport in New York on a flight to Cairo.
The new radar data came from the Air Force.
Earlier, using tracking information from civilian radar facilities in Boston, New York and on Nantucket Island, investigators believed the jet never climbed after its sudden dive from cruising altitude.
John Clark, deputy director of the NTSB's office of Research and Engineering, gave this account Wednesday night of what investigators now believe happened in the final minutes of Flight 990.
A half hour out of Kennedy, flying at 33,000 feet, the Boeing jet suddenly entered a steep but straight dive, down to 16,700 feet.
At that point, information was lost from the plane's transponder, which provides information to air traffic controllers about a plane's altitude.
The Air Force radar, though, continued to track the plane down to 16,000 feet.
Early in its 17,000-foot dive, the plane may have exceeded the speed of sound, though it began to slow as it neared 16,000 feet.
Then the plane, its transponder still out, climbed back to 24,000 feet, when it began a rapid descent to 10,000 feet where radar showed multiple targets, indicating it had broken up.
``It stopped being a flying airplane,'' Clark said.
Clark would not speculate on what kind of event could have triggered the initial dive, or whether the sudden climb indicated the pilots were struggling to regain control of the huge jet.
In addition to the new radar data, investigators also provided more detail Wednesday night about the deactivated thrust reverser on the twin-engine plane.
It was deactivated before the plane left Cairo on the first leg of its trip to Newark.
It then flew to Los Angeles and then to Kennedy before leaving on its last and fatal leg.
Greg Phillips, the NTSB's chief crash investigator, said the NTSB is sending someone to Cairo to check the plane's maintenance records and better understand what prompted maintenance crews to deactivate the thruster on the plane's left engine.
Information from the plane's flight data recorder, one of the two black boxes, should tell investigators if a thruster deployed in flight, he said.
Because another 767 crashed in Thailand in 1991 when a thrust reverser deployed, there has been speculation that may have been what happened on Flight 990.
But Jim Hall, chairman of the safety board, stressed again at Wednesday night's briefing, ``We have no evidence at this time that the thrust reverser system played any role in this accident''.
While the black boxes can provide important clues to the crash, it could takes many months or even years before the safety board issues a final report on the probable cause of the accident.
The safety board is still investigating the 1996 crash of TWA Flight 800 in these same waters.
A final report is not expected until at least the spring of next year.
NEW YORK, November 9 (Xinhua) --One of the "black boxes" of the plane on the EgyptAir Flight 990 has been recovered, U.S. searchers announced Tuesday.
"Black Boxes" are the flight data recorder and cockpit voice recorder, two vital instruments to help determine the cause of a plane accident.
A U.S.
National Transportation Safety Board spokesman confirmed the find, without identifying which recorder was recovered.
The U.S Navy waged a round-the-clock search on Monday for the boxes, eight days after the Boeing 767 plane crashed some 60 miles off Nantucket Island, Massachusetts, shortly after it took off from John F.
Kennedy International Airport in New York.
All 217 people on board were killed.
Two robots have been used during the operation in an effort to find and catch the boxes amid the wreckage at the Atlantic seabed 80 meter deep.
Following is a transcript, translated from the Arabic, of the final two minutes of the taped cockpit conversation of EgyptAir Flight 990 before it crashed on Oct.
31, 1999, as released Friday by the National Transportation Safety Board.
The voices on the recording are those of Gameel el-Batouty, a co-pilot, and Capt.
Ahmed el-Habashy, the pilot.
1:57 CO-PILOT I rely on God.
0:48 CO-PILOT I rely on God.
0:39 CO-PILOT I rely on God.
0:38 CO-PILOT I rely on God.
0:36 CO-PILOT I rely on God.
0:35 CO-PILOT I rely on God.
0:34 CO-PILOT I rely on God.
0:32 CO-PILOT I rely on God.
0:31 CO-PILOT I rely on God.
0:30 PILOT What's happening?
What's happening? 0:29 CO-PILOT I rely on God.
0:28 CO-PILOT I rely on God.
PILOT What's happening? 0:21 PILOT What's happening, Gameel?
What's happening? 0:12 PILOT What is this?
What is this?
Did you shut the engine? 0:10 PILOT Get away in the engines.
0:08 PILOT Shut the engines.
0:07 CO-PILOT It's shut.
0:05 PILOT Pull.
0:04 PILOT Pull with me.
0:02 PILOT Pull with me.
0:00 PILOT Pull with me.
PROVIDENCE, R.I.
(AP) --The remains of the first victims of EgyptAir Flight 990 have been identified, four months after the plane plunged into the ocean.
Medical, dental and fingerprint records were used to determine the identities of the 14 victims --all U.S. residents -- paving the way for families to bury their relatives.
The EgyptAir flight crashed Oct.
31 off the Massachusetts island of Nantucket, killing the 217 people on board.
A salvage ship worked for a week in December, raising the wreckage and remains off the ocean floor.
The Rhode Island medical examiner's office has been overseeing the identification process.
It has been working with 6,000 tissue fragments and a smaller number of body parts.
Only 1,300 fragments are suitable for DNA testing, and results may not be ready for 10 months.
A memorial service was held in November in Newport for all the relatives and many already held private funerals.
The National Transportation Safety Board estimated that 70 percent of the aircraft, including one engine, and sections of the wings, tail and body, was recovered.
On Friday, NTSB Chairman James Hall said the second engine would be raised.
A civilian ship with an underwater robot is scheduled to begin the task March 18.
''They did a good job on videotaping and taking pictures underwater, but it can also help if we have it out of the water to get a closer look at it,'' NTSB spokesman Keith Holloway said.
After an examination of the flight data recorder, the cockpit voice recorder, radar data and small amounts of wreckage, Hall said in November that there was no sign of mechanical failure that could have caused the crash.
Hall has disputed reports that investigators are increasingly convinced the jet was crashed deliberately, saying his agency must conduct more studies before they settle on a cause.
CAIRO, August 13 (Xinhua) --Egyptian Pilots Association chief Walid Murad demanded on Sunday that U.S. investigators probing last October's EgyptAir Flight 990 crash interview pilots who said they saw a shooting fireball near the crash site.
The testimony of the German and Jordanian pilots must be heard regarding their sighting of missile-like bodies in the same place the Egyptian plane went down, Murad told reporters.
According to documents released on Friday by the U.S.
National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), a Royal Jordanian co-pilot saw a fireball in the sky on the same day after leaving the same airport as the doomed EgyptAir flight.
The pilot of Flight RJ262 from New York's John F.
Kennedy airport on October 31 last year reported that his co-pilot made the sighting shortly after the takeoff while he had his head down.
The co-pilot said that he saw a fireball like a shooting star passing ahead at the Jordanian plane very close from right to left going down, the pilot wrote, as cited by Egyptian investigators in the NTSB documents.
The captain, who submitted his report to the airlines two weeks after the EgyptAir crash, said his plane had the same flight path clearance as the EgyptAir plane.
The head of the Egyptian Pilots Association asked for the pilots to be interviewed again and accused U.S. investigators of deliberately ignoring problems that hold the key to explaining the crash.
Murad joined Egyptian investigators in demanding the release of classified data regarding three high-speed radar images passing near EgyptAir Flight 990 just before it began its dive into the Atlantic.
"The absence of this information removes the credibility of the American investigators," he said.
Egyptian Civil Aviation Authority chief Abdel Fattah Kato has complained the withholding by the U.S. side the radar information for reasons of classified military data.
It was difficult to understand why data concerning the characteristics of radar used in connection with the U.S. civil aviation was classified and why it was unavailable for the analysis of apparent targets that were in the vicinity of the plane, he wrote in a letter to the U.S.
Federal Aviation Administration in June.
The letter was included in the investigation documents.
All 217 people on board died in the EgyptAir flight crash.
CAIRO, August 12 (Xinhua) --Egyptian aviation officials have demanded that the United States provide detailed radar information on last October's EgyptAir Flight 990 crash to explain high-speed radar images near the plane in its final moments.
A review of the 1,665 pages of documents about relevant investigations revealed a letter from Egyptian Civil Aviation Authority chief Abdel Fattah Kato, who complained the withholding by the U.S. side of the radar information, Egypt's Middle East News Agency reported on Saturday.
In the documents, which were made public on Friday in the U.S. and presented on the website of the U.S.
National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), Kato did not give credence to a theory that the plane was downed by a missile, but stressed the need to investigate fully what the Flight 990 crew might have seen.
The EgyptAir flight crashed into the Atlantic Ocean shortly after taking off from the New York International Airport on October 31, 1999, on its way to Cairo, killing 217 people on board.
The probe into this tragedy has produced radar data showing three high-speed returns in the area of, and along the path of, the Flight 990.
The data shows these returns crossing the plane's path just before it began its dive, Kato wrote to U.S.
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) on June 18.
He said that air traffic controllers had cleared the Flight 990 to pass through military "Warning Areas 506 and 105A" just prior to the accident.
It was difficult to understand why data concerning the characteristics of radar used in connection with the U.S. civil aviation was classified and why it was unavailable for the analysis of apparent targets that were in the vicinity of the plane, he wrote.
Kato added that it was apparent from the air traffic control transcript that no FAA controller was actually watching the Flight 990 at the time of the accident and for several minutes after.
The continuing Egyptian concerns appeared to question why NTSB staff had concluded that "there were no unresolved safety issues," as asserted Friday by NTSB chairman Jim Hall, who released the documents at a news conference.
WASHINGTON, November 15 (Xinhua) --A senior U.S. official raised the possibility Monday of handing over the probe leadership of the EgyptAir Flight 990 to another agency, hinting that the plane was possibly downed by a criminal act.
"We are concentrating our efforts on determining from the evidence, including the cockpit voice recorder, whether or not this investigation is to remain under the leadership of the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB)," said NTSB Chairman Jim Hall at a press conference here.
Hall acknowledged there have been "many rumors, theories and stories" circulating about whether the crash was caused by mechanical failure or a criminal act such as a hijacking, crew fight or pilot suicide.
If there is evidence of a crime in the plane crash, the investigation authority will be shifted to the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) under U.S. rules.
The EgyptAir passenger plane crashed into the Atlantic Ocean off the Massachusetts coast on October 31, killing all 217 aboard.
Hall met with FBI Director Louis J.
Freeh and other officials Monday to discuss whether there was enough evidence to open a criminal investigation, an Associated Press report quoted a law enforcement official as saying.
CAIRO, August 17 (Xinhua) --EgyptAir Chairman Mohamed Fahim Rayan said on Thursday he is "99 percent sure" that a technical problem rather than a suicidal pilot brought down an EgyptAir plane last October.
Rayan told a news conference that he is almost certain that there is something wrong in the elevator control system, citing as evidence a Boeing service bulletin earlier this week.
The elevators are movable panels on the horizontal tail surface which direct the aircraft's nose up or down.
The plane's manufacturer, Boeing Co.
, urged on Tuesday all airlines flying the Boeing 767s to perform a special inspection to ensure the integrity of parts that help move elevators, but said the stepped-up inspection is not connected to the crash probe.
The U.S.
National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) said last week it had been unable to conclude what caused the crash of EgyptAir Flight 990, which was heading for Cairo from New York on October 31, 1999, when it suddenly plunged into the ocean, killing all 217 people on board.
U.S. investigators hinted the relief co-pilot, Gameel el- Batouti, "brought down the plane in a suicidal act".
The Egyptian side has strongly opposed the speculations, stressing technical failure might cause the tragedy.
Egyptian and U.S. investigators "were seeking to know exactly what happened to the EgyptAir plane," Rayan said.
The U.S.
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) "has given credence to the Egyptian theory" that a prevalent malfunction in the elevator control system could result in a fatal accident, referring to FAA's decision to intensify inspection of Boeing 767s' elevator system.
Investigators from the United States and Egypt will review part of the flight control system in the tail of Boeing's 767 airplane as part of the investigation into the crash of EgyptAir Flight 990, the chairman of the National Transportation Safety Board said Friday.
The disclosure comes just a couple days after the chairman of EgyptAir told a news conference in Cairo that ``something happened'' to the tail of the Boeing 767 that caused it to go into a near supersonic dive before the plane broke up and crashed into the sea.
Safety board chairman Jim Hall said investigators from his agency and the Egyptian Civil Aviation Authority will examine the 767's elevator system, as well as perform a metallurgic examination of the plane's engine pylon components.
The elevators are flat panels on the horizontal stabalizer of the tail that control up and down movements of the plane when the pilot pushes or pulls on the control stick.
Hall's statement did not suggest that investigators suspect the elevator system played a role in the crash, and a Boeing spokesman said such a review is typical in airline crash investigations.
``The safety board is going through a deliberate and methodical process as they do on all their investigations, and Boeing continues to support the investigation,'' said Boeing safety spokesman John Dern.
There have been no reports of problems with the 767's elevator system or the engine pylons, Dern said.
All 217 people aboard the Boeing 767-300 died when it plunged into the Atlantic off the Massachusetts coast on Oct.
31, about 30 minutes out of New York's Kennedy Airport on a night flight to Cairo.
Investigators have found nothing in an analysis of the cockpit voice recorder that would point toward a bomb or a mechanical problem as the cause of its crash.
Radio communication between the flight crew and air traffic controllers was routine, and at no time did a member of the crew advise controllers of either an emergency or a mechanical problem or concern.
In addition, the plane's other black box, the flight data recorder, does not indicate there was an explosion or mechanical problem.
That points to another cause, and the leading theory is that the plane was brought down by a deliberate act of the backup copilot.
In his statement Friday, Hall blasted as ``wrong'' a published report this week that quoted unnamed government officials as saying a mechanical problem has all but been ruled out as the cause of the crash.
``NTSB is disturbed to see that again this week unidentified sources were used as the basis of a news report purporting to have informed knowledge of our work,'' Hall said in a statement released late Friday afternoon.
``As is often the case in these matters, the story was wrong.
No hypothesis for the cause of this accident has been accepted, and the activities that I have outlined indicate that there is much that still needs to be done before a determination of cause can be reached''.
In November, with no evidence the crash was an accident, Hall was prepared to turn the investigation over to the FBI _ further fueling the theory of pilot suicide _ when the Egyptian government strenuously objected.
Since then, the safety board has said little about how the investigation is going.
Hall said substantial portions of the wings, tail, fuselage and an engine had been recovered.
Hall said Friday that ``no decision has been reached at this point whether further wreckage recovery will ultimately be necessary, and both agencies (the safety board and the Egyptian Civil Aviation Authority) agree that additional work needs to be be accomplished before a final decision can be made''.
Hall said both agencies also believe that ``aircraft and operational system issues'' must be investigated further.
Timeline for EgyptAir Flight 990: *Friday EgyptAir Boeing 767, leaves Cairo, Egypt, bound for Kennedy International Airport in New York.
*Saturday 8:02 a.m.
EDT --Plane, diverted because of inclement weather, lands at Newark International Airport.
10:25 a.m.
EDT --Plane leaves Newark, N.J., bound for Los Angeles International Airport.
1:46 p.m.
PDT --Plane lands in Los Angeles.
4:30 p.m.
PDT --Plane departs Los Angeles for New York's JFK airport.
The scheduled time of departure from Los Angeles was 12:30 p.m.
*Sunday 12:48 a.m.
EDT --Plane lands at JFK airport.
1:03 a.m.
EST --Leaves gate at Kennedy Airport with 217 people aboard.
1:19 a.m.
EST --Plane departs bound for Cairo, Egypt.
1:43 a.m.
EST --Pilots make final radio communication.
(NTSB said 1:47 a.m). 1:50 a.m.
EST --Plane begins descent from 33,000 feet.
1:52 a.m.
EST --Last radar signal received from plane.
WASHINGTON, October 31 (Xinhua) --Radar tapes continued to show contact with an EgyptAir plane for about 90 seconds after it had begun a dramatic dive towards the Atlantic Ocean, the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) said Sunday.
The information provided by Jim Hall, chairman of the NTSB, indicated the plane plummeted from its cruise altitude of 9,900 meters down to 5,730 meters in 36 seconds, and then at least some part of it remained visible on radar for a much longer period of time.
"We do not know at this point what caused the crash," Hall said at a press conference.
"We are beginning what may be a long investigation".
All the 217 people on board are feared dead as the EgyptAir Boeing 767 passenger plane crashed early Sunday off Nantucket, Massachusetts State in the United States.
The U.S.
Coast Guard said there were no reports of survivors from the crash.
Flight 990 of EgyptAir, Egypt's national carrier, took off from John F.
Kennedy International Airport in New York at 1:19 a.m. local time (0519 GMT) en route to Cairo and disappeared from radar screen at 2 a.m.
(0600 GMT).
Hall said the government of Egypt has asked the U.S. government to take the lead in the crash investigation.
EgyptAir and Egyptian government officials were heading to the United States to assist in the investigation, he added.
CAIRO, August 15 (Xinhua) --Egyptian pilots have demanded the U.S.
National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) hand over the probe into the 1999 EgyptAir plane crash to a third party if it fails to release key evidence, Egypt's Al-Ahram daily reported on Tuesday.
The Egyptian Pilots Association wanted U.S. authorities to provide radar images for the investigations and NTSB to question an air traffic controller on duty at the time of the crash, Walid Murad, head of the association, told reporters on Monday.
EgyptAir Flight 990 crashed into the Atlantic shortly after takeoff October 31 from New York airport, killing 217 people on board.
After over nine months of investigations, NTSB issued a factual report last Friday.
While NTSB said "there are no unresolved safety issues," Egyptians have accused the U.S. of denying their access to the radar images on the pretext that they contained military secrets.
Murad further demanded that Egypt receive the plane's wreck and the two black boxes, recording flight and voice data, for re- examination, the pro-government newspaper said.
If the Egyptian demands are rejected, the investigation documents should be withdrawn from NTSB and given to a third party to reopen the inquiry, he said.
KUNMING, June 11 (Xinhua) --The incidence of malaria has declined from 249 people per 10,000 in 1953 to 3 per 10,000 in 1996 in southwest China's Yunnan Province, statistics showed.
Doctors in Yunnan, a notorious malaria-prevalent region before 1949, have worked hard to discover the characteristics and mechanism concerning the spreading of malaria under the special conditions which exist in the province.
The Yunnan Institute of Malaria Prevention, China's only malaria research organ of its kind, established in 1957, has been running classes in the past 40 years and has trained more than 2,000 personnel in malaria prevention and treatment.
Doctors also popularize knowledge on malaria prevention among people of various minority groups which are numerous in the province.
Since the 1990s, the institute has received 56 experts and researchers from 11 countries on academic exchanges and cooperation projects.
The research of the institute has been aided for seven consecutive years by the World Health Organization.
JOHANNESBURG, April 8 (Xinhua) --Five Southern African Development Community (SADC) health ministers reached an agreement here on Saturday on coordinating their efforts to combat malaria in the region.
The ministers from South Africa, Botswana, Mozambique, Swaziland and Zimbabwe said in a statement that an coordinated approach was essential to contain the spread of malaria.
They established a working group to investigate how to secure funds for malaria control plans and made recommendations on key areas in malaria prevention, treatment and control, according to the statement.
The statement said the working group was charged to investigate: --the prediction of unexpected climatic conditions that may adversely influence the incidence of malaria; -- the harmonization of treatment and prophylaxis protocols, vector control and the use of insecticides, taking into account the national scientific evidence and prevailing circumstances; -- developing clear guidelines on the rational use of malaria prophylaxis and treatment during pregnancy; -- examining and developing strategies to manage the effect of cross- border movements; -- the impact of the movement of people on the spread, management and reporting of the disease, and -- examining the extent of private sector influence on drug resistance.
The working group sub-committee would report on the progress of the investigations at the annual ministers' meeting next month.
The region has been hit by a recent spate of malaria caused by floods sweeping through a number of regional countries.
DAR ES SALAAM, October 11 (Xinhua) --Tanzanian Prime Minister Frederick Sumaye Monday called on people to use insecticide treated nets to prevent mosquito from spreading malaria.
Sumaye made the appeal while opening the Second International Conference on Insecticide Treated Nets in Tanzanian capital Dar es Salaam.
He said in Tanzania, malaria is the leading cause of outpatient services and the number one cause of child mortality.
Statistics indicated that 25- 42 percent of outpatient visits and 25 percent of deaths reported in Tanzanian health facilities are due to the disease.
Malaria is also a major impediment to social and economic development throughout Africa, he said, adding that it is estimated that by the year 2000 the annual direct economic cost of malaria across Africa will exceed 3.
5 billion U.S. dollars, twice what it was in 1995.
He said many governments in Sub-Saharan Africa overstretched their resources to provide prevention and treatment services on malaria related illness.
For example, outpatient treatment of malaria accounts for up to 40 percent of Africa's public health expenditure.
The recent emergence and spread of malaria resistant to chloroquine, a drug that has saved millions of lives for over five decades, further highlights the need to promote new strategies to protect vulnerable populations from infection and put our emphasis on preventative measures, he noted.
The use of insecticide treated nets (ITNs) is one of the key components of prevention, he said.
He said based on field trials in Tanzania, Kenya and Ghana, it has been established that when properly used ITNs could reduce mortality by more than 30 percent, and hospitalization by more than 40 percent.
"We learnt also that malaria could be prevented, and more than 500,000 lives could be saved each year (C if ITNs were widely available to many households in Africa," he said.
Meanwhile, the Tanzanian Prime Minister said that the fight against malaria by destroying habitat of mosquitoes has to continue, adding that people need to clean their surroundings by cutting grass and shrubs around houses and destroying stationary water ponds.
The conference, sponsored by the London-based Malaria Consortium, has attracted more than 230 delegates from some 40 countries across the world.
The first conference was held in Washington in 1997.
WASHINGTON(AP) --Americans won a new drug Friday to prevent malaria when they travel to countries ravaged by the mosquito-borne infection.
The Food and Drug Administration approved Malarone, the first new anti-malaria option in 11 years.
Malaria is a parasitic infection that is one of the world's worst scourges.
It sickens at least 300 million people every year and kills up to 2.7 million.
Drugs and insecticides have made it rare in developed countries, but it is almost impossible to escape in tropical, developing nations.
Worse, it is evolving to resist many treatments.
Symptoms include fever, chills, headache, muscle ache and malaise.
Without prompt treatment, kidney failure and other problems can cause death.
People who become ill with a fever during or after tropical travel should see a doctor and make sure to mention the trip, the FDA advised.
Also, people planning travel to a malaria-endemic country should see a doctor first about prevention.
Glaxo Wellcome Inc.'s Malarone was approved to prevent and treat malaria in adults and children.
It combines two medications: atovaquone, used to treat lung infections in immune-compromised patients, and proguanil, an old malaria therapy.
In four clinical trials in Africa, two out of 279 people who used Malarone for three months developed malaria.
In comparison, 92 out of another 297 people who took a placebo developed malaria.
Another eight clinical trials in countries in Africa, Asia, South America and Europe concluded Malarone is an effective malaria treatment, too.
The main side effects were headache and abdominal pain; children also reported vomiting and itching.
Glaxo said the prescription drug will be available in mid-August but would not reveal a price.
----- On the Net: http://www.fda.gov/opacom/hpwhats.html
HARARE, June 8 (Xinhua) --The World Health Organization (WHO) regional office for Africa said here Monday it was preparing for a program that would progressively reduce illnesses and deaths due to malaria to a minimum in Africa over the next 25 years.
The program, called African Initiative for Malaria Control in the 21st century (AIM), will be launched next year and will cover all the 46 countries in Africa.
In a statement, the WHO said the initiative will be implemented in phases and was expected to reduce malaria illnesses and deaths in the region by 50 percent by the year 2010.
"The ultimate goal, according to WHO, is that by the year 2030, malaria will neither be the major contributor to mortality and morbidity nor significant socio-economic consequence," said the statement.
Malaria is one of the leading health problems in Africa, especially in sub-Sahara region.
About 550 million people in the African region risk the disease.
The disease attacks between 270 and 480 million people and kills between 1.5 and 2.7 million each year.
The malaria problem is increasing because the malaria parasite has developed resistance to some of the anti-malaria drugs and insecticides.
"The economic consequences of malaria-related diseases are enormous.
The direct and indirect losses due to malaria in the region rose from 800 million U.S.
Dollars in 1987 to more than 2,000 million U.S.
Dollars in 1997," the statement said.
The key features of the implementation of the initiative will be early treatment of malaria cases, promotion of the use of insecticide-impregnated nets, prevention and strengthening of the capacities of countries and communities to combat the disease, according to the statement.
ADDIS ABABA, October 25 (Xinhua) --Medicine spraying activities are being undertaken in Rift Valley of the central Ethiopia to halt the malaria epidemic in the area, a report from the Ethiopian News Agency said today.
The report quoted local official Kemal Morke as saying that medicines have so far been sprayed at over 24,000 residential houses in Rift Valley and over 83,000 residents in the area have been protected from being infected by malaria.
Kemal said that the malaria prevention activities are being undertaken in a series of campaigns because of the occurence of the epidemic in the area in a larger scale than that of last year.
Meanwhile, blood test services have been given to 24,500 persons and those who are found infected are being treated, Kemal added.
According to the report, most of the victims of the epidemic are expectant mothers and children.
NAIROBI, June 24 (Xinhua) --Malaria is resurging in many countries where it has been sharply reduced or even eradicated and more than a third of the world's total population now live in malaria endemic areas, experts say Wednesday.
It is estimated that 300 to 500 million clinical cases and 1.5 to 2.7 million deaths occur due to malaria each year, about twice as many as 20 years ago, according to papers presented at the third Pan-African Conference on Malaria which ended here Wednesday.
About 100 experts and senior health officials from 34 African countries attended the continent's top-level anti-malaria meeting which started Sunday.
Currently the number of countries and regions suffering from the disease reaches 100, said a press release issued by the conference.
Annual number of deaths of children under five years of age attributed to malaria hits one million, the experts said, "During the last 10 years, malaria has killed 10 times more children than all the wars that have raged over the same period".
Rapidly increased drug resistance is leaving populations with no effective drug for prevention against or treatment of the eighth lethal killer in the world --the top one in Africa -- the experts noted.
"Malaria is thus much more lethal in 1998 than in 1968," they claimed.
"There is urgent need for research into new malaria compounds" and more urgent need for enhanced joint efforts especially by African countries to fight the disease, they said.
Sub-Saharan Africa hosts more than 90 percent of Malaria victims.
"At present, the only organized effort, in the continent, addressing this issue (malaria) systematically is the African Malaria Vaccine Testing Network," said Assistant Executive Secretary Robert Mshana of the Organization of African Unity.
The conference is aimed at enabling experts to exchange scientific findings on epidemiology, therapeutic strategies and the implementation of national anti-malaria programs.
The participants also studied the possibilities for the establishment of a multi-national South-South cooperation on researches and training in the field.
UNITED NATIONS, October 30 (Xinhua) --The United Nations system launched a campaign here Friday to combat malaria which kills about 1 million children every year.
In his message welcoming the campaign, U.N.
Secretary-General Kofi Annan said the fight against malaria enables the U.N. to focus its efforts on an issue "which has caused so much suffering in Africa and other developing regions for all too long".
Malaria causes an estimated 300 to 300 million acute cases per year, with most deaths occurring among children in Africa.
Studies have found that poor health via disability from diseases such as malaria reduces incomes by as much as 12 percent in affected developing countries, according to U.N. information.
The use of simple prevention and control methods has shown starting results, the U.N. said.
For instance, in trials conducted in Gambia, Burkina Faso, Kenya and Ghana, the use of insecticide-treated bed nets was shown to effectively protect sleeping children from malarial mosquitoes, resulting in dramatic reductions in deaths.
Based on satellite mapping and climatic information, the distribution of malaria can now be determined at the community level and the information will benefit national and international efforts for malaria control.
New discoveries have led to a variety of approaches to a malaria vaccine, with many of the possibilities already undergoing human trials.
However, scientists estimate that it will take seven to 15 years before an effective malaria vaccine is ready.
HARARE, November 25 (Xinhua) --The Zimbabwean government will spend 1.3 million U.S.
Dollars on insecticides this season to control the malaria-causing parasite,Zimbabwean Health and Child Welfare Secretary Paulinas Sikosana said today.
Sikosana made the statements at a meeting at which the 1996/97 malaria prevention and control campaign was launched.
He told the participants that an additional 600,000 U.S.
Dollars would be spent on anti-malarial drugs.
The money was not enough to eliminate the disease and it is up to the provincial medical officers to mobilise additional resources to support the programme in their areas, he added.
More than 6,000 people are estimated to have died from malaria this year, with most of the deaths occurring between January and May.
Sikosana said health officials should educate the community on how malaria is contracted and how it can be prevented.
The World Health Organisation resident representative Levon Arevshatian said more than 90 percent of all malaria cases in the world were in sub-Saharan Africa.
Arevshatian said 1.5 to 2.7 million people died from the disease each year, especially among children below five years.
GENEVA, March 29 (Xinhua) --Nigeria will host the first major summit on accelerating action against malaria in Africa on April 25,the World Health Organization (WHO) announced here Wednesday.
More than 50 African heads of state, G8 heads of state, the heads of 10 international development agencies and a dozen development and health ministers have been invited to the summit, said WHO.
Leaders whose countries are most seriously affected have already accepted.
Nigerian President Olusegun Obasanjo will chair the summit which is being co-organized by WHO.
Malaria causes more than one million deaths each year, according to WHO which coordinates the global partnership Roll Back Malaria initiative that aims to halve the numbers of malaria deaths by the year 2020.
The majority who die are African children and deaths linked to malaria in Africa overall are increasing, WHO said.
At the end of the summit, heads of state will issue a declaration on tackling malaria in Africa and new statistics on the crippling effect malaria has on economic development in African countries will also be launched.
One week before the summit, on April 18, the world's largest bednet will be unveiled with hundreds of African school children.
The Guinness Book of Records will be present to record the event.
WHO hopes that the event will draw attention to the urgent need to provide more insecticide treated bednets in Africa, adding that insecticide treated nets are one of the most effective tools for the prevention and control of malaria.
PARIS _ Malaria hurts African economies more than has been recognized but could be better controlled for relatively little money, according to a new study to be released Tuesday.
The study, by the Harvard Center for International Development and the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, will be presented in Nigeria at the first conference at which African heads of state will meet to discuss malaria, which kills more than 1 million people a year, most of them children.
Analyzing the effects of malaria on 27 African economies between 1965 and 1990, the study concluded that the disease cut one percentage point a year from the annual growth rates of those economies.
If malaria had been eliminated in 1965, the annual gross domestic product of Africa would now be $400 billion rather than $300 billion, the study estimated.
The study's economic models, according to Jeffrey Sachs, director of the Harvard center, took into account more than the costs of treatment and losses associated with death.
They also estimated the losses from tourists and foreign investors who avoid malaria-prone countries, the damage done by large numbers of sick children missing school and the increase in population and impoverishment when parents have extra children because they know some will die.
In most affected countries, the disease crosses class lines.
``It doesn't matter if you are rich or poor _ your chances of catching it are high,'' said Nils Delaire, president of the Global Health Council, a participant in the conference.
The conference this week in Abuja, Nigeria, is sponsored by the World Health Organization and will draw together U.N. agencies, the World Bank, Western donors and the heads of 20 African countries in a Roll Back Malaria campaign that hopes to halve deaths from malaria, a mosquito-borne disease, within 10 years.
The chief weapon the sponsors endorse is a simple one: bed nets treated with insecticide.
After that, they favor more spraying to kill mosquito larvae, education of rural people in the use of simple blood tests and cheap drugs to keep patients alive until they can reach doctors.
(BEGIN OPTIONAL TRIM) Nets alone could cut the disease by half, but only 2 percent of all African children sleep under them.
Each $8 spent on prevention adds about a year of healthy life to an African, according to Ann Mills, one of the London School analysts who worked on the study.
``World spending on malaria control and research for Africa is maybe 10 cents per case per year,'' said Sachs.
``It's quite dreadful.
World Bank lending for malaria is de minimus.
The big pharmaceutical companies see it as a disease of the very poor, so they never view it as much of an investment priority''.
Meanwhile, he said, many malaria-prone countries have per capita incomes of less than $300 and health budgets too small for ``these very reasonable interventions''.
(END OPTIONAL TRIM) Sachs suggested that Western nations could significantly cut the disease by spending $1 billion a year on malaria.
The U.S. share of that, he said, would be 75 cents per American.
``In a world where we're enjoying riches beyond what was imagined 20 years ago, we can afford to do more than we do,'' Sachs said.
He might even, he said, dare to also suggest $1 billion for AIDS and $1 billion for tuberculosis, for a total of $2.25 per American.
``I think Americans would readily come up with $10 per person if they believed it was cost-effective,'' he said.
``And bed nets aren't going to end up in a bank account in Switzerland''.
The Clinton administration is offering tax breaks of up to $1 billion for any company that invents a malaria vaccine, and the Gates Foundation, created by the founder of Microsoft, is investing $250 million in the research.
HARARE, November 16 (Xinhua) --The World Health Organisation (WHO) in collaboration with the southern African countries will hold a consultation and planning meeting on accelerated support for malaria prevention and control in the region between November 17 to 21 in Harare.
WHO said today in a statement the meeting was aimed at strengthening the consultation, planning, monitoring and evaluation of malaria control programmes in southern Aafrica.
It would also prepare annual work plans for 1998, establish systems for implementation and monitoring of integrated annual malaria work plans, develop a format for this year's annual reports and review the status and follow up on forecasting and epidemic preparedness in the region.
The development of a consensus for malaria survelliance, information systems and monitoring trends would also come under the spotlight as well as reviewing the report of the first southern Africa malaria conference and recommending strategies and methods for implementation and follow up.
At least 30 participants from Angola, Botswana, South Africa, Swaziland, Mozambique, Malawi, Namibia, Zambia, Zimbabwe and Tanzania are expected to attend the meeting.
Malaria continues to be one of the most serious public health problems and a major obstacle to social and economic development in southern Africa.
LAGOS, December 27 (Xinhua) --Malaria is spreading quickly in sub-Saharan Africa as a result of deforestation, global warming, creation of dams, irrigation schemes and commercial tree cropping, said a fact sheet released by the World Health Organization.
Malaria affects 40 percent of the world's population in more than 90 countries while over 90 percent of the cases are in Africa where there are increasing levels of chloroquine resistance, the News Agency of Nigeria (NAN) Sunday quoted the recently-released WHO fact sheet as saying.
Malaria kills one million people every year in the world and the vast majority of deaths occur among young children and pregnant women in Africa, said the WHO's fact sheet.
It stated that the costs for the treatment of malaria in sub-Saharan Africa exceeded 2.1 billion U.S.
Dollars last year alone.
"In spite of drug resistance, malaria is a curable disease," it said, adding that research and development in malaria prevention and treatment have made advances.
Drug combinations for multi-drug resistance malaria and vaccines against malaria are being developed at the global level while insecticide-treated mosqui nets and curtains have emerged in recent years as a promising tool to prevent malaria disease.
The WHO, the World Bank and other U.N. organizations this year have joined forces to launch a new campaign called "Roll Back Malaria" to fight the disease.
Malaria was in its usual top spot on the agenda when 1,800 experts in travelers' health met in Montreal last month.
Malaria protozoa, which move in parasites spread by mosquito bites, have evolved strains resistant to drugs faster than human research can catch up.
There is no vaccine, and the disease causes the deaths of a million people annually in Africa alone.
There is considerable risk for American travelers.
Government figures show that from 1980 to 1995, it got reports of 3,513 civilian cases, of which the vast majority, 2,907, were contracted in sub-Saharan Africa.
All but 185 of the others were from Asia, the Caribbean and South America.
There were 59 deaths among these cases, 43 of which were contracted in sub-Saharan Africa.
This year, the conference of the International Society of Travel Medicine had a major new malaria drug to discuss, Malarone.
In the weeks just after, the computer exchanges of the society spun with talk of where the drug could be bought legally and, whether for prevention or treatment, what the cost would be.
Glaxo Wellcome is expecting approval of Malarone _ its name for pills combining atovaquone and proguanil _ by the Food and Drug Administration for sale in the United States as a preventive drug and as a treatment for malaria.
The company submitted its application in December.
So far, Malarone has been approved for both prevention and treatment in Denmark only, and is approved solely for treatment in Britain, although physicians there report giving it to travelers as a protective measure, too.
As a preventive, Malarone must be taken daily while mefloquine, which is now the most-prescribed drug in the United States for prevention of malaria, is taken weekly.
Physicians worry about travelers' compliance when drugs must be taken daily.
But mefloquine, sold under the trade name Lariam by Roche Holdings, is not recommended for people subject to seizures or psychiatric disorders.
News reports of nightmares and more serious side effects have caused apprehension, particularly in Britain.
These concerns mean that a new drug to ward off malaria is welcome.
Testing supervisors said the the possible side effects of Malarone were headache, abdominal pain, upper respiratory infection, pain, nausea or vomiting.
In Britain, Malarone costs (PS)2 a pill, or about $3.15.
It is expected to cost $2.50 to $3 or more in the United States _ a weekly cost of $17.50 to $21, against the $10 weekly for one Lariam pill.
Lariam is started one or two weeks before a traveler leaves to evaluate side effects, and is continued for four weeks after return.
Malarone, a Glaxo Wellcome spokesman said, is started one to two days before entering the malarious area, and is continued only seven days after return.
Mefloquine was developed when malaria evolved into a form that resisted the drug chloroquine.
Now resistance to mefloquine is reported in areas of Thailand and western Cambodia.
There are other drugs in the laboratory that may be developed for use when resistance to Malarone develops, which one expert estimated might be in about 10 years.
In any case, no malaria prophylaxis is 100 percent sure, and travelers should take careful precautions against night-biting mosquitoes in malarious areas, and should be aware of the symptoms _ fever and chills, muscle aches and headache, a situation often mistaken for influenza by physicians not aware that a patient may have traveled to a malarious area.
Prompt treatment is vital.
Physicians say that properly treated, malaria is not fatal.
Chickenpox was also on the agenda at the Montreal meeting.
Chickenpox is easily communicable _ for instance, one can catch it from a fellow passenger on a bus or plane.
In the United States, according to Dr.
Mary Wilson's reference work, ``A World Guide to Infections'' (Oxford), 90 percent of the cases occur in children under age 10, who are then usually immune for life.
Overseas, the disease is more common among adults, who may suffer serious consequences, including pneumonia and encephalitis.
It is important for adult Americans who are going to work among young people overseas or refugees, or who are traveling the backpack-and-hostel route to be immune to chickenpox.
That means travelers must know they have had it, or have been vaccinated against the varicella zoster virus with a vaccine that was licensed only in 1995.
In Montreal, Dr.
Elaine C.
Jong of the University of Washington School of Medicine presented a paper, ``Varicella Vaccine: Is It a Travel Immunization''? in which she concluded it probably was.
Others concurred.
``The pretravel clinic visit,'' Dr.
Jong said, ``is an opportunity to immunize susceptible healthy travelers against chickenpox, which could cause illness and exclusion from travel before, during or after the trip, and protects the residents in receiving countries against imported infection''.
For adults, the vaccine requires two injections.
At Travelers Medical Service in New York, the director, Rebecca W.
Acosta, said her questionnaire for pretravel visits asks clients whether they have had chickenpox.
If they are in doubt, she said, the clinic performs blood tests because they are cheaper than the course of two vaccinations, which costs a total of $150.
Most clients are found to be immune, she said.
Ms. Acosta said that some states and many school districts are now requiring chickenpox vaccinations because fewer Americans are getting the disease in childhood than formerly.
One problem is that the chickenpox vaccine is so new no one is sure how long it confers immunity.
Lyme vaccine is also on the list of recommended vaccines at the Acosta's clinic.
This is recommended for domestic travelers over 15 who are going climbing or camping in areas where Lyme disease has occurred.
Three shots, at $75 each, are recommended.
The schedule now recommends the second shot after 30 days and the third after a year, but this is likely to be modified to quicken full immunity.
The vaccine is not approved for children under 15.
A paper presented at the conference by Dr.
Martin Cetron of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and associates reported on research, not yet complete, into the deaths of three people _ aged 63, 67 and 79 _ who had received yellow fever vaccine.
The paper implies that the vaccine may be more dangerous to older people than to others.
The yellow fever vaccine is the only one for which the World Health Organization still condones requiring a certificate.
But, the WHO says, many countries require this certificate when the vaccination is not really needed.
Both the organization's book ``International Travel and Health; Vaccination Requirements and Health Advice'' and the CDC's ``Health Information for International Travel'' list the countries requiring the certificate, but those requirements are based on whether a traveler has recently been in a yellow fever area.
Some doctors say that colleagues may administer the yellow fever vaccine even when a traveler is going directly from the United States to a country requiring a certificate only for those arriving from infected areas.
Cetron said that a great deal more research into the specifics of the three cases was ahead, but that one thing was clear: Physicians and clinics should be sure that the traveler's itinerary requires yellow fever vaccine.
Mrs. Acosta said that requirements were often misinterpreted; for India, for example, it depends where the traveler will be only in the six days preceding arrival.
Another health warning emerged as summer began: A flu epidemic in Alaska and the Yukon Territory of Canada.
According to the Centers for Disease Control, 428 acute respiratory infections among tourists and 104 among tourism workers from May 22 to June 29.
Four tourists were hospitalized with pneumonia, and the centers said that laboratory analysis indicated that the illnesses were influenza A, a viral infection.
Last year, almost 5,000 people on land and sea tours in the area fell ill and four died of flu.
The CDC suggested that travelers at risk for flu, including people over 65, speak to their doctors before leaving and ask about taking along prescription antiviral pills, either amantadine or rimantadine.
Cetron said that antivirals, taken within 48 hours of flu symptoms, could lessen the risk of complications.
The flu vaccine for next year will not be prepared until fall.
The 1999-2000 edition of ``Health Information for International Travel'' made its debut at the conference.
This big yellow book, which most commercial travel-health guides lean on, has been reformatted for clarity and legibility.
The information on malaria risk and prophylaxis has been updated as of April, and the section on recommendations for the HIV-positive travelers has been expanded and shifted to a section on travelers with special needs.
The book is sold by the superintendent of documents, (202) 512-1800 as document No.
017-023-00202-3. It costs $22 in the United States; $27 from overseas.
OUAGADOUGOU, June 10 (Xinhua) --African leaders have once again pledged their effort to fight against malaria which is plaguing the world's poorest continent and claiming a large number of lives every year.
The 34th assembly of heads of state and government of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) in a decision calls upon all member states to commit additional human and material resources for malaria prevention and control, including disease surveillance and research, in line with the development of health sector reform.
It also asks them to mobilize all partners, public and private, local and foreign, to support the execution of malaria prevention and control activities as part of the economic recovery and development.
At the same time, the assembly requests the World Health Organization (WHO) to continue working closely with the OAU to coordinate efforts aimed at the eradication of malaria from the African continent and to increase its level of support in that respect.
The summit acknowledged the initiative and critical role played by WHO in 1997, specifically the generous assistance provided by the director-general through the accelerated program of malaria control in Africa, the actions taken to develop strong community-based approaches to ensure sustainability of control and the continuing support in 1998.
You may wonder why I would write a health column about malaria when there is no malaria in the United States.
Well, that is only partly true.
Malaria is not endemic in this country or to Canada or Europe.
But one-third of the world's population lives where the malaria parasite and its carrier mosquitoes thrive, and every year more than 1 million Americans travel to those areas for business or pleasure.
Malaria, it seems, is gaining ground annually as control efforts become more costly and cumbersome.
Worldwide there are 300 million to 500 million cases of malaria and 2 million to 3 million deaths from the disease each year.
And each year the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta receives reports of 1,000 to 1,200 cases of malaria that were acquired abroad but diagnosed in this country.
A malaria expert at the centers, Dr.
Trenton Ruebush, estimates that an equal number of unreported cases occur among United States residents.
But Ruebush said that all malaria deaths that occur in the United States, normally four or five a year, are probably reported.
Why so many cases, and why should anyone die of a disease that doctors have long known how to cure?
Because many people outside the endemic areas do not take malaria seriously and ignore the measures recommended to prevent it or are careless about them.
When the flu-like symptoms of malaria develop, they are often not acted on soon enough.
In addition, outside of endemic areas, doctors often fail to recognize the symptoms of malaria and thus do not make the correct diagnosis or treat the disease properly or quickly enough to cure it.
Complicating matters, preventive measures have gotten trickier and much more costly in recent years, ever since the malaria parasite in most areas developed resistance to chloroquine, the inexpensive and well-tolerated medication that had long been used to prevent and treat malaria.
Current options cost a lot more and are associated with potentially more serious side effects.
Furthermore, there is currently no effective anti-malarial vaccine, nor is there one on the immediate horizon, despite efforts by scientists in the United States and elsewhere to uncover the parasite's Achilles heel and block its ability to flourish in the human body.
A WILY PARASITE Malaria is a disease of the tropics and subtropics.
Its range extends as far north as the Mediterranean, Middle East, Mexico, Northern India and China and as far south as South Africa, Argentina and New Guinea.
There are four types of the malaria parasite that normally infect people, and only one _ Plasmodium falciparum _ is potentially deadly.
P. falciparum flourishes in Africa, where it is responsible for 95 percent of cases.
In fact, Ruebush said, 90 percent of all malaria infections and 90 percent of malaria deaths occur in Africa.
In other endemic areas, falciparum malaria is responsible for 5 percent to 50 percent of cases.
The other three types, P.
vivax, P.
ovale and P.
malariae, are far less virulent, although they can make their victims quite miserable for varying lengths of time.
As Dr.
Robert S.
Desowitz, an expert in tropical diseases, explains in his engrossing book ``The Malaria Capers'' (W.W.
Norton, 1991), a malaria infection in humans begins when an infected female Anopheles mosquito, seeking a blood meal to foster the development of her eggs, injects into the human bloodstream threadlike malaria parasites called sporozoites that have been stored in her salivary glands.
Thousands of sporozoites are usually injected into the blood with one mosquito bite, and they quickly invade the cells in the liver where they multiply.
In this period, the infected person experiences no symptoms.
The first symptoms appear about 10 to 35 days later when the liver cells burst and the spores enter the blood stream, causing intense chills and sweating with high fever.
Then the symptoms come and go _ usually in 24- to 72-hour cycles _ as the tiny parasites feed on the oxygen-carrying hemoglobin of the infected person's red blood cells.
Each cycle can render the victim more anemic with less and less oxygen reaching the brain and other vital tissues.
Ruebush said that two of the nondeadly species could remain alive in a person's liver for up to a couple of years, periodically causing relapses of malarial symptoms.
The other nonfatal form can hide in the body outside the liver for up to 30-40 years, waiting for some unknown signal to trigger its emergence and cause a recurrence of symptoms.
The deadly species, P.
falciparum, causes the most severe symptoms, but if the victim does not get treated and does not die, the infection burns itself out within a year or two.
PREVENTION AND TREATMENT Since there is no vaccine against malaria, prevention depends on two important measures: taking a drug that combats the parasite prophylactically _ that is, in advance of any known infection _ and avoiding bites by the Anopheles mosquito.
In the few areas where there is still little or no chloroquine resistance, this drug is taken weekly starting one week prior to departure for the endemic area, weekly while there and for four weeks after returning home.
For most endemic areas where chloroquine-resistant parasites flourish, the Centers for Disease Control now recommends mefloquine, sold under the trade name of Lariam.
This drug is taken one time a week before departure, each week while in the malaria area and for four weeks after returning.
It is extremely effective but expensive _ about $7 a tablet _ so for a two-week trip the cost is about $50.
Lariam can sometimes cause anxiety, depression, hallucinations and insomnia, and in one in 10,000 or 15,000 cases, these side effects are incapacitating.
A trip-mate of mine to Panama developed sky-high blood pressure, fever, shaking chills, severe anxiety, hallucinations and was unable to walk on her own, all attributed to Lariam.
It took her months to recover.
An equally effective alternative to Lariam is doxycycline, which is recommended for northern Thailand, where mefloquine resistance has been detected.
Doxycycline has to be taken daily, starting one to two days before departure and continued for four weeks after returning.
Anyone who chooses doxycycline must be very conscientious about taking it every day; if you miss a couple of days, you are unprotected.
Among the possible side effects are upset stomach, yeast infection in women and increased sensitivity to the sun _ which means you must remain covered to avoid a severe sunburn.
A standby treatment is the drug Fansidar, which can cause rather severe skin rashes.
It is used only as an emergency treatment, should symptoms suspicious of malaria develop when the person is far from medical care.
But even if one takes Fansidar, it is vital to get to a doctor for thorough treatment as soon as possible.
Ruebush emphasized that preventive medication is only one measure.
Travelers should be aware of the habits of the Anopheles mosquito, which typically reigns in rural areas and bites between dusk and dawn (although in heavily shaded jungle areas it may bite in daylight).
Use of protective clothing and insect repellent and a mosquito net over the bed at night (preferably first dipped in a solution of insecticide) are important parts of malaria prevention.
Anyone who develops a fever a week to a month after being in an area where malaria is a problem must report immediately to a doctor, who should do a blood smear right away.
As Ruebush said, ``Malaria is eminently curable if it is caught early and treated appropriately''.
Many large cities now have clinics that advise travelers and administer vaccines.
State and local health departments may also be helpful.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta has a malaria hotline _ 770-488-7788 _ that can be reached 24 hours a day every day and where callers can request a faxed copy of protective information.
HARARE, June 4 (Xinhua) --African leaders today reaffirmed their "unflagging resolve" to prevent the outbreak of malaria which claims 4,200 lives every day on the continent.
The leaders, ending their 33rd summit here, issued a declaration which considers malaria control in Africa as one of the continent's priority programs.
The declaration said African countries "support fully the implementation of the Global and Regional Strategy and approaches recommended by the World Health Organization".
African countries, the declaration said, will implement well planned and coordinated malaria control programs involving individuals, families, communities, institutions, relevant government ministries, and other public and private sectors.
The declaration called on African countries to allocate sufficient human, financial and material resources, and mobilize other local resources including resources from non-governmental and private and civil sectors, for the sustained prevention and control of malaria in Africa.
Efforts should also be made to mobilize additional external resources from international agencies, governmental and non-governmental agencies, foundations and industrial and commercial enterprises to support national and commercial action to control malaria and surveillance to prevent epidemics and sustain the progress already made, the declaration said.
It suggested the following actions: --Give full political support to actions directed towards sustainable malaria preventioan and control as an urgent priority; -- Further develop and implement plans for malaria prevention and control, including incorporation into development projects based on environmental and health impact assessments; -- Develop strong community based programs to mobilize active community participation for malaria prevention and control; -- Promote and support micro-financing schemes, especially for women, to initiate income generating projects aimed at basic environmental and household improvements; -- Develop mechanisms that will facilitate and ensure well coordinated multisectoral action to reduce substantially the burden of malaria and promote inter-country collaboration and coordination of efforts; and -- Promote basic and operational research to ensure that new tools, including vaccines, are made available without delay and existing ones are used in the most cost-effective and sustainable manner.
HANOI, August 25 (Xinhua) --Malaria spread in 14 central and central highland provinces of Vietnam in the first seven months this year, Vietnam News Agency reported Tuesday.
The number of malaria patients and deaths increased by 5.71 percent and 14.9 percent respectively in these provinces.
Seven of 14 provinces in the region saw rapid increases in the number of malaria patients, and 54 deaths were reported.
32 villages in seven communes of Tra My district of Quang Nam province had outbreaks of malaria, with 15,000 people infected.
The worsening epidemic is attributed to neglect of prevention measures against the deadly disease.
Unseasonably warm weather, which caused the rapid development of mosquito sectors, low standards of living, limited awareness of malaria and a weak health care network were other factors to blame.
To remedy the situation, local health care networks would be strengthened, disease prevention facilities better supplied and awareness on malaria prevention raised, reports said.
enditem nnnn
HANOI, January 28 (xinhua) --The number of malaria deaths in Vietnam last year dropped by 70 percent compared with that of 1995, local media reported today.
Only 198 cases were reported in the year against 660 cases in 1995.
The achievement was attributed to the joint efforts of the medical sector at different levels and the anti-malaria teams preventing outbreaks of the disease.
The medical teams have provided medicines to 2-2.5 million people and distributed three million mosquito-nets for malaria prevention in remote and mountainous areas.
This year, the health care service plans to promote health care awareness, teach people how to prevent malaria by themselves, help village medical stations to detect malaria patients, and provide mosquito-nets to all people in remote, isolated and mountainous areas.
MANILA, November 26 (Xinhua) --The Philippines has made a big stride in malaria control with malaria infections rate in the country is now generally low, a senior health official said today.
Malaria infection rate in the Philippine has been reduced from a yearly 7.4 per 1000 in 1994 to 3.8 per 1000 in 1996, according to Health Secretary Carmencita Reodica.
"The massive infusion of logistics, training of key personnel, the active support of local governments and communities, have resulted to the marked improvement of the malaria situation in the past six years," Reodica said in a statement.
From 1991 to 1996, the health chief noted, the confirmed cases of malaria were reduced from 86,392 to 39,855.
The malaria control program is being implemented by the Department of Health through its regional field offices in collaboration with 824 local government workers, she said.
Although funding for the program has been drastically reduced, "the achievement in control and prevention is significant," Reodica said.
The Philippines is also in step with the World Health Organization target of a 50 percent reduction in Malaria cases in the Western Pacific region in the year 2000, she added.
The health department has recently officially declared the elimination of Malaria in 13 provinces out of 78 provinces in the country.
Reodica said that out of the remaining provinces where malaria is endemic, 16 have infection rates of less than one per l000 population per year, three have had no indigenous case in the past two years.
The malaria problems in the country are mainly concentrated among farmers, forest workers, charcoal makers, migrant workers and settlers in hard-to-reach communities, including provincial boarders, cultural minorities slash and frontier areas, she said.
UNITED NATIONS _ Three major U.N. agencies and the World Bank said Friday that they were joining forces in a coordinated campaign against malaria, a leading killer of the world's poorest people.
Malaria, which is reaching epidemic proportions in Africa and parts of Asia, Latin America and the southern fringe of the former Soviet Union, kills about a million people a year, and children are especially vulnerable.
Experts say one child dies of malaria every 30 seconds.
Around the world, malaria kills 3,000 children under 5 every day, a higher mortality rate than AIDS.
Research on prevention and cures for malaria has been all but nonexistent in big pharmaceutical companies for more than two years because the drugs proved not to be money-makers, experts said Friday.
At the same time the parasites that cause malaria and the mosquitoes that carry them have alarmed public health officials with their fast-evolving resistance to most known medicines and insecticides.
``We're dealing here with just about the cleverest pathogen that's known to human medical science,'' said Dr.
David Nabarro of Britain's foreign aid agency, who will become manager of the anti-malaria program in January.
The project will be coordinated by the World Health Organization in Geneva, in cooperation with the U.N.
Development Program, UNICEF and the World Bank.
The new drive against malaria is the first big project undertaken by the World Health Organization's new director general, Dr.
Gro Harlem Brundtland, a former prime minister of Norway and a public health specialist.
She took over the huge agency in May, vowing to shake it up and make it more responsive to immediate needs.
At a news conference Friday she called malaria a cause of rising human suffering that targets the young and the weak, and said her project, to be called Roll Back Malaria, was prompted in large part by calls for help from African leaders.
Experts say 90 percent of malaria cases are in sub-Saharan Africa.
Dr. Brundtland also said that this project will be a ``pathfinder'' in better U.N. cooperation.
The anti-malarial drive will draw on each participating agency's special expertise, pooling resources in an effort to eliminate costly overlaps.
It is a policy in line with Secretary-General Kofi Annan's management reforms, which seek to streamline the way the organization works and make it more effective.
The leaders of the cooperating agencies said Friday that the anti-malaria drive will include efforts to generate new research in the pharmaceutical industry and to raise money from reluctant governments, as well as local efforts to provide health centers with insecticide-impregnated mosquito nets for village beds and packets of fast-acting pills or suppositories for malaria sufferers.
The budget for the first year has been estimated at about $19 million for the organizations involved, with additional money being sought from governments where the disease is rampant and the labor force is weakened or reduced as a result.
``Funding is less of an issue than getting governments to focus on malaria,'' said James Wolfensohn, president of the World Bank, at Friday's news conference.
``We are trying to make the case to financiers that this is central to the economic development of Africa''.
James Gustave Speth, administrator of the U.N.
Development Program, said his agency was well placed to look at the environmental situation in countries struck by malaria _ issues of sanitation, for example.
He said the ``social fallout'' of malaria was also of concern to his agency.
Carol Bellamy, executive director of UNICEF, the U.N. children's fund, said her organization would focus, as it already does, on local-level work in poor communities, where malaria contributes significantly to a high maternal mortality rate and to a high incidence of anemia among women and children.
Nabarro, now strategic director for human development at Britain's Department for International Development, said in an interview Friday that ``collective brainpower'' was necessary if health officials had any hope of even halving malaria deaths in a decade.
He said wiping out malaria is an impossible goal.
(STORY CAN END HERE.
OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS) Nabarro, who has worked in Iraq and Nepal as well as Africa, and taught international community health at the Liverpool School of Medicine, explained that the project did not have a single goal, like some public health campaigns.
``What we're instead trying to do is approach an incredibly complicated health issue that's associated partly with the way in which people have to live, partly with a parasite that has one of the best disguises that we know _ in the face of any threat it can change its coat _ and an insect vector that seems to be able to shake off insecticides almost as quickly as we produce them''.
Dr. Tore Godal of Norway, a tropical medicine expert who is now acting director of the anti-malaria program, said in an interview that one of the best hopes of finding medicine to cure the disease may be in a plant cultivated in China and used there and in Vietnam as a very effective treatment.
The plant is the ching hao su.
``The Chinese have used it for more than 2,000 years against fevers,'' Godal said.
The World Health Organization has been encouraging China to make medicines from the plant to standards that would meet international requirements, Godal said.
He said that the compound in ching hao su attacks malaria so quickly and at so many levels that it also seems to help curtail the spread of the disease by destroying parasites before they can be passed on.
Godal has also been involved in trying to persuade pharmaceutical companies to invest in anti-malarial drugs.
He said only one, Smith Kline Beecham, has showed much interest.
``The Vietnamese war actually made the U.S.
Army invest big in malaria drug development, and so some pharmaceutical companies took up leads from that effort,'' he said.
But today, he said, ``There is no sufficient commercial market for the drugs,'' so pharmaceutical companies are shying away from projects like this that would take years to show a profit.
WASHINGTON (AP) --Researchers have discovered a possible new way to vaccinate against malaria, which kills up to 3 million people a year and sickens an additional 300 million.
Creating a vaccine is crucial because the parasite has begun developing resistance to drugs used to treat malaria, and even mosquitos that spread the disease are withstanding pesticides.
But finding a malaria vaccine has proved exceptionally difficult, and testing in 1997 concluded the candidate long thought the best hope was actually worthless.
The reason most vaccine attempts have failed is that they focused on just one part of the malaria parasite's complex life cycle.
But researchers from the U.S.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and from India have created a multipronged vaccine designed to make the immune system fight the parasite at many stages: When the mosquito bite sends it into the body, when it invades the liver and when infection moves into the bloodstream.
Rabbits immunized with the new vaccine produced antibodies that prevented malaria parasites from invading liver cells and from replicating in the blood, the researchers reported Monday in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
Just because the vaccine stimulates a rabbit's immune system doesn't mean it would work in people, cautioned parasitologist Anthony Holder of London's National Institute for Medical Research.
The CDC hopes further testing in primates will prove promising enough to try the vaccine in people.
WASHINGTON (AP) --A team of researchers has discovered a possible new way to vaccinate against malaria, one of the world's biggest killers.
Malaria kills up to 3 million people a year and sickens another 300 million.
Creating a vaccine is crucial because the parasite has begun developing resistance to drugs used to treat malaria, and even mosquitos that spread the disease are withstanding pesticides.
But finding a malaria vaccine has proved exceptionally difficult, and testing in 1997 concluded the candidate long thought the best hope was actually worthless.
The reason most vaccine attempts have failed is that they focused on just one part of the malaria parasite's complex life cycle.
Now researchers from the U.S.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and from India have created a multipronged vaccine designed to make the immune system fight the parasite at many stages: When the mosquito bite sends it into the body, when it invades the liver and when infection moves into the bloodstream.
The scientists immunized rabbits.
The animals' immune system produced antibodies that prevented malaria parasites from invading liver cells and from replicating in the blood, the scientists reported Monday in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
Just because the vaccine stimulates a rabbit's immune system doesn't mean it would work in people, cautioned parasitologist Anthony Holder of London's National Institute for Medical Research.
The CDC hopes further testing in primates will prove promising enough to try the vaccine in people.
HARARE, May 2 (Xinhua) --Africa is optimistic in its endeavors to eradicate malaria which has affected the social and economic development of the continent, health experts meeting in Harare said.
The experts who met for the two-day preparatory committee meeting on the African initiative for malaria control in the 21st century were from different institutions affiliated to the World Health Organization (WHO), the Zimbabwe News Agency reported Saturday.
According to a provisional report released Saturday in Harare, the meeting which ended Thursday resolved to develop an effective and timely malaria surveillance and information system.
That would help develop a practical malaria control strategy in all malaria endemic countries by the year 2005.
It was also envisaged that by the year 2030, malaria would no longer be the major cause of deaths in Africa.
The targets adopted by the meeting included reduction of malaria mortality by 50 percent by the year 2010, and reduce by at least half the socio-economic negatives of malaria.
The experts said they were encouraged to come up with the strategy which channeled 10 million U.S.
Dollars towards malaria control in Africa last year.
A further boost to their initiatives was through the commitment of African leaders to combat the disease as evidenced by the Organization of African Unity (OAU) Harare Declaration on Malaria Prevention and Control signed in June 1997 in Zimbabwe's capital city.
The meeting also suggested that a competent interim secretariat be urgently recruited.
The secretariat would have a degree of operational independence from WHO.
It was also recommended at the meeting that an African Initiative for Malaria (AIM) steering committee be elected based on a coalition of major stakeholders and medical personnel to develop the fight against malaria.
LAGOS, August 4 (Xinhua) --A recent research study in Nigeria has shown that children under six months old could suffer from malaria, a situation which was previously considered unimaginable.
Scientists hold that children at that age and below were never thought to have malaria parasites because it was assumed they were protected from the disease by the immunity acquired at birth, the Panafrican News Agency reported Wednesday.
However, the study says that the discovery could assist medical practitioners to adequately treat infant babies who presented vague symptoms of malaria.
The study, sponsored by the African Regional Office of the World Health Organization (WHO) in collaboration with the Nigeria Institute of Medical Research, aims at ascertaining the current trend of the malaria scourge among communities along the coastal areas of Nigeria.
Dr. Bamigboye Afolabi, who led a team of the researchers in Ibeshe Island, an isolated coastal village in Lagos State, said that about 30 percent of the 450 children seen in the first part of the study had malaria parasite.
"This research will definitely lead to improvement in the tools for diagnosis and treatment of malaria and its prevention," he said.
"Most importantly, it will not only reduce the severity of the ailment among pregnant women and children, but reduce the high mortality due to the disease".
Afolabi said that the detailed result of the study had been forwarded to the WHO, adding that its findings could be applicable to other parts of tropical Africa, as well as other malaria endemic regions.
Statistics show that more than 80 percent of the population of sub- Saharan Africa are at risk of malaria.
According to Lateef Salako, Director-General of the Nigeria Institute of Medical Research, "of the approximately 300 million cases of malaria estimated to occur globally every year, over 85 percent are from Africa, and of the estimated two to three million annual deaths, over 90 percent are in Africa."
And Merante notes that there are some benefits to being an openly gay candidate.
``It can be easier to raise money and recruit volunteers, and a more moderate candidate can gain support among some liberal non-gay voters''.
Money, obviously, plays an important role in campaigns.
And in California, San Diego City Councilor Christine Kehoe, a congressional candidate and lesbian, had raised $705,624 through the end of June, as compared with GOP incumbent Brian Bilbray's $650,123, according to Federal Election Commission figures.
That cash is expected to give Kehoe _ the Democratic nominee _ a strong chance to become the first openly gay woman elected to national office.
It is a title that Tracy would like, as would Tammy Baldwin, in Wisconsin, or retired Army Colonel Margarethe Cammermeyer in Washington, who was discharged from the military in 1992 after saying she was a lesbian.
Both are running for Congress.
Like the other congressional candidates, they are offering themselves as candidates who happen to be gay, not gay candidates.
&QL; ---- &QC; &QL; In 1974 _ the year after the American Psychiatric Association erased homosexuality from its compendium of mental illnesses _ Elaine Noble, openly gay, was elected to the Massachusetts Legislature.
She is believed to have been the first openly gay person ever elected to a state office anywhere in the country.
Since then, there has been a trickle of openly gay candidates, and more like Frank, who ``came out'' after serving in office.
``Any minority that feels oppressed is going to be more politicized than the mainstream,'' says Merante.
``Issues such as family life, taxes, and inheritance are problems if you are gay and tend to make people think and act politically''.
But one reason for the gay community's relatively quick fluency in politics is AIDS, say gay activists.
``AIDS brought gay people to the fore like no other thing had,'' says Mary Bonauto, civil rights director for Gay and Lesbian Advocates and Defenders.
``The community was ravaged and had to come out to their families, interact with the medical system in a way they had not before.
Doctors and nurses saw committed, caring relationships between men, people caring for their partners to death''.
Frank says he doubts he would have won his tough first election if he had announced in 1980 that he was gay.
But, he says, the more that people come out, the more it diminishes prejudices.
``It is a very powerful force, a very successful reality check, and the average American is a lot less homophobic that he or she thinks they are supposed to be,'' he says.
Another reason for the double-digit number of gay candidates in Massachusetts is that it is, well, Massachusetts.
According to Victory Fund, there are 12 openly gay elected officeholders in the state, from municipal officials in Cambridge and Northampton to state Representative Liz Malia and Frank.
It is the highest number of gay officeholders, per capita, in the country.
``Gay and lesbian candidates feel they no longer have to hide in the closet, especially within the Commonwealth,'' says Dana Hilliard, a candidate from Newburyport running for a state legislative seat.
``It is a sign of how accepting this state is''.
Hilliard has served three terms as a state representative in New Hampshire _ but when he campaigned in the Granite State, he was not open about his sexual orientation.
And Miller says that ``Massachusetts is a special case; the political atmosphere here is more open.
Michael Duffy is running on the Republican ticket'' for state auditor.
In fact, the only other Republican candidate in either the Massachusetts or congressional races who is openly gay, is US Representative Jim Kolbe, of Arizona.
Like Frank, Kolbe announced his sexual orientation after several terms in office.
Miller also credits former Governor William Weld, a Republican who supported the gay movement, with helping make Massachusetts a more tolerant state.
``When I was working on `In Search of Gay America,' I went to Mississippi to interview a gay Republican, and when word got out that he might be gay, he withdrew from the race,'' recalls Miller.
``Almost all of these people are Democrats, and that is really significant''.
Mark Goshko, the local president of the Log Cabin, an organization of gay Republicans, notes that recruiting candidates _ gay or straight _ to run for office has been harder for Republicans than Democrats.
``In Massachusetts, the Democratic Party has much higher registration, and recruiting GOP candidates has been a general problem,'' he says.
Despite that, Goshko says, ``This is the year that the floodgates have opened for gay candidates.
Until this year really, fairly few people would run''.
What does Noble, the pioneer in 1974, think about the number of candidates?
``On the one hand,'' she says, ``it surprises me there are so many, and on the other, it saddens me there are so few.
And it is sad that folks say `You are gay' before they say `What are your stands on the issues'?
``Sometimes, I feel like a grandmother sitting off in the corner, clucking.
Win, lose, or show, they do advance issues tremendously, and they are all smart and bright.
Even if they come in last, they have won by being there''.
&QL; (Matthew Brelis is the Globe's Focus writer.)
WASHINGTON _ Democratic and Republican lawmakers predicted Tuesday that the House will reject legislation that would nullify President Clinton's executive order barring federal agencies from discriminating against people based on sexual orientation.
The House is scheduled to vote on the issue this week when Rep.
Joel Hefley, R-Colo.
, offers it as an amendment to a $28 billion appropriations bill funding different government agencies.
``I think we will defeat Hefley,'' said Rep.
Jim Kolbe, R-Ariz.
, the only openly gay House Republican and a critic of the measure.
``But I never take these things for granted''.
Rep. John Linder, R-Ga.
, chairman of the National Republican Congressional Committee, said he ``wouldn't be surprised'' if the Hefley measure is defeated.
``There's some very hard work being done'' to defeat the proposal, Linder said.
Kolbe said he expects the 20-minute debate on the Hefley amendment to stay focused on the topic of discrimination against gays and lesbians.
Republican leaders, concerned that their party could be perceived as anti-gay, had hoped to focus the debate on presidential powers.
To that end, the GOP House leadership had combined Hefley's proposal with legislation to nullify another executive order expanding federal jurisdiction at the expense of state and local governments.
However, President Clinton last week rescinded the executive order dealing with federalism, thus blunting the Republican move to convert the gay-discrimination debate into a dry discourse on constitutional powers.
Rep. Barney Frank, D-Mass.
, an acknowledged homosexual and a leading congressional spokesman for gay rights, also predicted that the Hefley amendment ``is likely to lose''.
``We're talking about discrimination,'' Frank said.
``I think most people don't want to be associated with it''.
Rep. Mark Foley, R-Fla.
, who was among a group of Republicans counting votes on the Hefley amendment, also predicted it would fail.
``It seems a number of members have looked at it and come to the conclusion that it was mean-spirited,'' Foley said.
He opposes the amendment.
Rep. Brian Bilbray, R-Calif.
, said Clinton's executive order barring federal agencies from discriminating against gays ``is the kind of thing we need to see more of''.
Clinton's May executive order added ``sexual orientation'' to a 1969 executive order by President Richard Nixon, which bars federal agencies from discriminating based on race, color, religion, gender, national origin, disability or age.
``It's not a Democrat or a Republican issue,'' Bilbray said.
``When it comes to the workplace, we shouldn't tolerate any discrimination''.
Kevin Ivers, a spokesman for Log Cabin Republicans, a gay advocacy group, said he is ``cautiously optimistic'' that the Hefley amendment will fail because of opposition among House Republicans.
Members of Congress ``are being confronted with this issue head-on without an escape hatch,'' Ivers said.
``This vote is unlike any vote we've seen in years.
It is a complete confrontation between those who believe in discrimination and those who oppose discrimination against gays.
There is no middle ground''.
Last week, the House approved a measure aimed at San Francisco's ``domestic partners'' law.
That ordinance requires private contractors who do business with the city to bestow the same benefits _ mainly health insurance coverage _ on the unmarried partners of their employees as they confer on the spouses of their married employees.
The San Francisco policy was enacted two years ago after intense lobbying by gay rights advocates.
By a 214-212 vote, the House approved a measure sponsored by Rep.
Frank Riggs, R-Calif.
, that would bar San Francisco from spending federal money unless the city revokes the ordinance.
The Riggs amendment is expected to fail in the Senate.
WASHINGTON _ Texas Gov.
George W.
Bush's top campaign strategist defended the Republican presidential frontrunner's controversial decision to snub leaders of a gay GOP group, asserting Wednesday that the Log Cabin Republicans have been critical of Bush on several issues.
The strategist, Karl Rove, said the group's leaders have asked for meetings with Bush ``with the stated purpose of coming in and explaining why Governor Bush is wrong on gay adoption or why he is wrong on broadening the Texas hate-crimes bill'' to protect gays against attacks based on their sexual orientation.
Rove, who is based in Austin, Texas, added in a meeting with reporters here that ``the national office of the Log Cabin Republicans has been critical of Bush and is in fact doing a fund-raiser for John McCain''.
The governor has ``a limited amount of time, and we're just not going to set aside right now a time to meet with (Log Cabin leaders) and talk about their dialogue,'' Rove said.
Besides his hate-crimes and anti-gay-adoption positions, Bush, as governor, has refused to support gay marriages.
Rove held out the possibility of a future meeting between the group and Bush but said the candidate already enjoys support among gays.
``We have gay Republican supporters and advisers who are involved in the campaign and whom we meet with regularly,'' he said.
Kevin Ivers, spokesman for the Log Cabin Republicans, the nation's largest GOP homosexual group, called Rove's remarks ``very disappointing''.
He added that ``his comments are not at all reflective of the long and cordial relationship that we had with him for months''.
Rich Tafel, the group's executive director, said Bush ``has created what has become a confrontational situation.
We have now heard five different reasons why they won't meet with us.
Now it's because we attack them.
The campaign is saying, `We don't need to hear your opinions.
Get on board'''.
The controversy began after Bush's response last month to a question on NBC's ``Meet the Press''.
Asked whether he would meet with the Log Cabin Republicans, Bush replied, ``Probably not''.
He contended that such a meeting would create ``a huge political scene,'' and added, ``I am someone who is a uniter, not a divider.
I don't believe in group thought, pitting one group of people against another.
And all that does is create kind of a huge political, you know, nightmare for people''.
Arizona Sen.
John McCain, who also is seeking the Republican presidential nomination, recently met with the Log Cabin Republicans in Washington.
Like Bush, McCain opposes gay marriage and adoption and new hate-crime laws, but he told the group he would battle discrimination against gays.
Meanwhile, in other campaign matters, Rove said Bush will accept federal matching funds for the general election, assuming he wins the Republican presidential nomination.
Under government campaign spending rules, a candidate who accepts federal funds must abide by spending limits.
In explaining Bush's decision, Rove told reporters that ``it is awfully difficult to raise $60 million or thereabouts between the (political) convention and the Election Day and still campaign''.
He said Bush doesn't want to have to focus on fund-raising, but would rather be out ``shaking hands''.
During the long pre-primary season, Bush has raised an estimated $70 million on his own, which has allowed him to forego federal funds and spending limits.
(STORY CAN END HERE.
OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS).
Rove also said that while Bush holds a commanding lead over the five other Republican candidates in national polls, ``every month I expect the numbers to tighten appreciably''.
In fact, a new survey released Wednesday by the American Research Group, a polling organization based in Manchester, N.H., shows McCain leading Bush in New Hampshire 37 percent to 30 percent.
Rove said Bush could stumble in some of the nine major primaries held early next year.
In addition to New Hampshire, Rove said McCain ``is competitive'' in his home state of Arizona.
``Somewhere along the line in one of those nine early states there's going to be a rough patch or two in the road,'' Rove said.
``But we have built a campaign that is able to endure and win and compete everywhere.''
WASHINGTON _ Gay Republicans call it the Selma of their own civil rights movement: Dallas, where the religious right dominates the GOP the way liberals dominate politics in San Francisco.
It was in Dallas two months ago that the spokesman for the Texas Republican Party, Robert Black, called the Log Cabin Republicans a ``deviant group'' like the Ku Klux Klan and denied the gay organization a booth at the state party convention.
``We don't allow pedophiles, transvestites and cross-dressers, either,'' he explained.
``Being a gay Republican in Texas is a little like being a black Democrat in Mississippi in the 1950s,'' said Dale Carpenter, Texas director of the Log Cabin Republicans.
``You're involved in a party that doesn't really want you, where you're excluded, discriminated against, segregated''.
When the Log Cabins protested their exclusion from the convention, they were met with venomous counterprotesters who shouted slurs, shoved and pushed them and waved signs saying ``God Hates Fags''.
So it is in Dallas this weekend that about 200 Log Cabin Republicans from around the country will gather for the group's national convention, challenging the GOP to come to terms with the gays and lesbians in their own ideological family.
``I think the radical statement of the gay civil rights movement is that you can be gay and be anything,'' said Carpenter.
``We are everywhere in society''.
Log Cabin Executive Director Rich Tafel said gay Republicans should fight rather than switch parties _ to prevent the GOP from becoming a Republican version of George Wallace Democrats.
``If you're a Republican and you believe in individual rights, less government and free markets, the Republican Party holds those principles still,'' Tafel said.
``Gay Republicans are simply saying, `We're staying and fighting for those principles'.
'' Sharpening the irony of the debate, the Log Cabin Republicans have invited two conservative icons to address their convention: University of California Regent Ward Connerly and Washington political pundit Arianna Huffington.
Connerly once said that the vitriol he heard when announcing his support for gay domestic partner benefits was worse than anything he heard in his battles to end affirmative action.
Huffington has rebuked her fellow conservatives for their intolerance of homosexuality.
The group also invited Andrew Sullivan, a prominent gay Catholic activist who advocates gay marriage as a conservative family value.
The debate over gay rights is part of a larger _ and more politically dangerous _ battle over the direction of the Republican Party.
Connerly and his allies in the party's libertarian wing believe that the GOP should represent limited government, low taxes and individual freedom _ including the freedom to live as a gay person.
On the other wing are the social or religious conservatives, whose greatest concern is what they see as America's moral decline, reflected by crime and the breakup of the traditional family unit.
For social conservatives, homosexuals embody all that is wrong with America _ a deviant lifestyle that in their view subverts religious and family values.
Like abortion, the gay movement evokes the kind of emotional force that can bring social conservatives running to the voting booth.
And that is just what the GOP needs this November, when control of the House of Representatives will hinge on which party can best energize its core supporters.
A net loss of just 11 seats would return the House to the Democrats and deliver a devastating blow to Republicans.
Social conservative activists such as Gary Bauer, head of the Family Research Council and a potential presidential contender, and James Dobson of the ``Focus on the Family'' radio talk show, have made homosexuality a major campaign theme, running full-page advertisements in major newspapers about how ``ex-gays'' renounced their homosexual lifestyle.
``It's one of those things that the party is very uncomfortable with,'' said an aide to a high-ranking House Republican.
``For some segments of the party, the whole gay issue is taboo, and the Gary Bauers of the world exert a lot of influence on them''.
But some party leaders are taking steps to address the matter head-on.
For the first time, the chairman of the Republican National Committee, Jim Nicholson, will meet with the Log Cabin Republicans on Aug.
21. ``We enjoy the support not just of straight Republicans and straight Americans, but gay and bisexual Americans as well,'' said party spokesman Mike Collins.
``We want their support.
They want lower taxes, they want a balanced budget, they want to take people off welfare and give them jobs.
We're doing that.
And we welcome their support''.
&UR; &LR; Collins' comments reflect a considerable fear within the party that anti-gay rhetoric will cast the GOP as intolerant or bigoted.
A former official in President George Bush's administration who is homosexual contends that some party conservatives see the gay issue as a way to ``throw some red meat to the religious conservatives, at minimal risk''.
But he noted that even former Christian Coalition head Ralph Reed is urging Republicans to back away.
``A tone of intolerance and exclusion plays very badly in today's America, and only somebody with a political tin ear would think that you improve your position by gay bashing or anyone-else bashing.
.. . Every time you have this sort of `we want to tell you how to run your life' behavior, it makes it harder for Republicans in the Northeast and Midwest to gain ground''.
Jim Pinkerton, a former political strategist for Bush, said that while religious conservatives may think promoting anti-gay views is a good idea, the Republican Party as a whole does not.
The party is having a difficult time accommodating both sides.
And the public itself is of two minds: Polls consistently show that a large majority of the public condemns discrimination but at the same time does not approve of homosexuality _ or bringing ``queer values to suburbia,'' as Pinkerton put it.
Pinkerton argues that Republicans do need the support of social conservatives.
``But they should find better ways to do it,'' he says, ``by promoting such issues as school choice that animate religious conservatives, libertarians and minorities alike who are dissatisfied with public schools''.
Arizona's Jim Kolbe, the only openly gay Republican in the House, said many of his colleagues ``sincerely wish this thing would not come up and not be voted on, because of the obvious conflicts it puts them in''.
But Texas Republicans see no conflict.
Party spokesman Robert Black defended the decision to exclude the Log Cabin Republicans from the GOP convention, saying individuals are free to participate in the state party, but not ``narrow special interest groups''.
Asked why the Christian Coalition was allowed a booth, Black said, ``OK, let me redefine that.
A special interest group that is so fundamentally at odds with the core principles of the Republican party.
Republicans, at least here in Texas, by and large are against homosexuality.
That's not really news.
It's in our platform''.
&UR; &LR; Tafel said that is why the Log Cabin Republicans will be in Dallas this weekend.
``We really view Texas as the frontlines of the gay movement,'' Tafel said.
``It's important for the gay community, in general, that gay Republicans stay and fight because that's the frontlines, that's where the battles are taking place.''
WASHINGTON _ A coalition of influential Christian groups has launched a national ad campaign attacking homosexuality, igniting a firestorm of protest Tuesday as the religious right gears up for the November elections.
Praising Senator Trent Lott, the Republican majority leader from Mississippi who recently likened gays and lesbians to alcoholics and kleptomaniacs, the $200,000 ad blitz characterizes homosexuals as sinners in need of Christian healing.
The controversial campaign, widely seen as an effort by the Christian right to provide indirect support for congressional candidates who promote the movement's agenda, sparked outrage among gay rights leaders and produced the unintended consequence of exposing a major rift in the Republican Party.
Several GOP candidates facing tough elections in key races tried to distance themselves from the ad campaign.
``It's really wrong for both the Republican Party and the country,'' said Peter G.
Torkildsen, a Massachusetts Republican trying to regain the seat he narrowly lost in 1996 to Representative John F.
Tierney, a Democrat.
``I don't see that it serves any useful purpose at all,'' Torkildsen said.
``It incites fear in people, and it is not the traditional Republican role for the government to intervene in people's private lives''.
The ad campaign is funded largely by the Christian Coalition, whose chairman, Pat Robertson, sought the GOP nomination for president in 1988, and the Family Research Council, whose leader, Gary Bauer, is considered a prospective Republican contender for the White House in 2000.
In full-page ads this week in the New York Times, the Washington Post and USA Today, the coalition promotes the highly disputed theory that people become homosexuals by choice.
``Homosexuality is not a sex issue, it's a heart issue,'' one ad stated.
``There are problems for homosexuals even condoms can't fix''.
Elizabeth Birch, executive director of the Human Rights Campaign, which advocates gay and lesbian rights, said numerous medical and mental health groups have agreed in recent decades that homosexuality is not a product of personal choice.
Birch asserted the ads were part of an effort by the Christian groups to promote their agenda in association with GOP congressional leaders.
Robertson recently met with Lott and other key Republicans in the House and Senate to push for the religious right's priorities, as did James Dobson, who heads the Family Research Council's parent group, Focus on the Family.
``Now you're seeing some of the fruits of that alliance,'' Birch said.
``They are using these very manipulative ads to throw red meat to the firebrand, extreme-right, grass-roots wing of the Republican Party.
It's nothing more than a crass political move in an election year''.
Birch said the Human Rights Campaign was buying a full-page ad in today's editions of USA Today to counter the offensive.
Arne Owens, a Christian Coalition spokesman, denied the ad campaign was aimed at providing support for Lott and other congressional leaders who have stepped up their criticism of homosexuality since Robertson and Dobson visited Capitol Hill earlier this year.
``This message is not emanating from the GOP,'' Owens said.
``It's a non-partisan message based on the mainstream concern about the decline of morality in America''.
Owens said the advertising campaign would continue, although he declined to provide details.
He asserted the impetus for the campaign was to defeat the push for broader homosexual rights.
``This is a subject most Americans, including us, would rather not have to address, but since it is being advanced by the gay lobby, somebody needs to respond and provide some leadership,'' Owens said.
``The pro-family movement is doing just that''.
In Tuesday's Washington Post, the ad displayed a photograph of a large group of people who claim they no longer are homosexuals because of ``God's healing love''.
``We're standing for the truth that homosexuals can change,'' the ad stated.
The ad thanks Lott and former Green Bay Packers star Reggie White, among others, ``for having the courage to speak the truth about sexual sin''.
Representative Barney Frank, a Massachusetts Democrat who is one of two openly gay members of Congress, challenged the assertion that individuals choose their sexual orientation.
``I've never met anybody who told me they decided to be homosexual or heterosexual,'' he said.
``Virtually every gay man or women I know was terribly upset when they first figured it out.
The notion that people voluntarily choose this is just nuts''.
Frank said studies have shown that people who believe individuals choose their sexual orientation are more likely to discriminate against homosexuals.
He asserted the ads were aimed at building opposition to antidiscrimination initiatives.
``Homophobia is losing the cultural war,'' Frank said, ``so they are doing this to try to pump up their side in the political arena.''
SAN FRANCISCO _ In the final days of his race for U.S.
Senate in California, Republican Matt Fong's stance on gay rights has become a dominant concern.
The hubbub over Fong's recent contribution to an avowedly anti-homosexual organization is delighting incumbent Sen.
Barbara Boxer and her fellow Democrats, who see the issue distracting Fong and dividing Republicans before Tuesday's election.
The issue was kicked up again Tuesday as religious conservatives, led by a Sacramento lobbying group, attacked Fong, the state treasurer, for pledging to support what it called a ``homosexual agenda''.
``For a candidate to cave in to the gay activists in the final days of the campaign shows a complete lack of conviction,'' Michael Bowman, executive director of the Capitol Resource Institute, said in a statement.
The criticism came a day after Fong signed a pledge to support gay causes such as benefits for domestic partners and anti-discrimination laws, part of an effort by Fong to quell the anger of gay Republicans over his $50,000 contribution to the Traditional Values Coalition, which is led by the Rev.
Lou Sheldon.
The national Log Cabin Republicans, a gay group, reaffirmed its support for Fong.
But the San Francisco chapter of the organization withdrew its endorsement, citing Fong's link to Sheldon, an ardent gay-rights opponent who at one time suggested quarantining people with AIDS in ``cities of refuge''.
The debate has pitted religious conservatives, who are active in Republican politics, against gay and socially moderate Republicans, who want the party to take a softer line on issues of concern to gays and lesbians.
And Fong, who has sought to find a centrist position, finds himself being attacked by both sides.
At a fund-raiser in the Chinatown section of San Francisco Tuesday night, Fong said he would be a ``unifier'' and bring the state together, but steered clear of any direct mention of the controversy over his donation.
``We are a tremendous state made up of diversity,'' Fong told 300 supporters at the $200-per-person event.
``America is a great country because we've always chosen hope over fear.
We've always chosen unity over division''.
But Fong was less than eager to face questions related to his $50,000 contribution.
He canceled a public event and avoided reporters at the Chinatown fund-raiser.
Fong spokesman Steve Schmidt said the candidate wasn't worried about losing votes, either from gay Republicans or conservatives.
``Conservatives have been with us from the beginning and will continue to be with us,'' Schmidt said.
``No one has pulled their support''.
Bowman, however, criticized Fong for agreeing to support domestic partnerships, or unions of unmarried people, which he said promote homosexuality.
``Since the leading candidates both support the homosexual agenda to weaken families and society, conservative voters don't have much of a choice on Election Day,'' Bowman said.
Democratic Party officials have tried to capitalize on the division in the Fong camp.
On Monday, Democratic strategist Bob Mulholland faxed to gay groups around the state the story of Fong's $50,000 contribution.
On Tuesday, when Fong pledged his support for gay issues, Mulholland faxed the story to Christian radio stations.
``He gets squeezed on this issue,'' Mulholland said.
``Here it is the last week, and this is what he's talking about''.
Republican Party officials tried to downplay the issue, which they described as a fringe struggle between GOP groups that will never agree on a common agenda on gay issues.
``I think voters believe there are more important issues,'' said Mike Madrid, political director for the Republican Party.
``The people who this concerns made up their minds years ago.''
WASHINGTON _ Prominent Republican presidential candidates are creating an atmosphere that is subtly but fundamentally more inviting to gay and lesbian voters than party leaders have been in recent memory.
Texas Gov.
George W.
Bush, Sen.
John McCain and Elizabeth Dole _ who combined have the lion's share of support among Republicans in early polls _ have signaled an openness to gay supporters, including a willingness to appoint them to positions like ambassadorships.
The new receptivity toward homosexuality follows a similar soft-pedaling by leading Republicans on abortion.
While they still oppose abortion and are by no means converts on other gay rights issues like same-sex marriage, the most prominent candidates are offering a lower-key, more inclusive approach designed to appeal beyond the conservative base of the party to independent and Democratic voters in a general election.
It also reflects the continued growing political influence of gay donors and gay voters across party lines.
The new message on gay supporters is a far cry from 1996, when Republican nominee Bob Dole returned a $1,000 donation from the Log Cabin Republicans, a group of gay party members, and from 1992, when the dominant voice on the issue from Republicans was that of Patrick Buchanan, whose declaration of a ``culture war'' was aimed squarely at homosexuals.
Buchanan and other conservative candidates have not changed their views, and even Bush, McCain and Mrs.
Dole have not embraced a broader gay agenda that also includes adoptions by gays and a less punitive approach toward gays in the military.
But gay political leaders say the difference in attitude is striking nonetheless.
``The tone has totally changed,'' said Rich Tafel, executive director of the Log Cabin Republicans.
``What I hear is gay Republicans enthusiastic about the tone being set by the leading candidates.
It looks like Republicans for the first time are saying, `This is a community I'm not going to alienate and maybe I want to reach out to it'.
That's kind of a shocking revelation''.
(STORY CAN END HERE.
OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS) Democrats, of course, have courted gay voters for years, and this year both Vice President Al Gore and former Sen.
Bill Bradley, the two rivals for the Democratic nomination, are competing for their support.
Both campaigns have fund-raisers working expressly with gay donors, who tend to be generous financially and active politically.
So intense is the Gore-Bradley rivalry for gay support that the two candidates even appeared recently at the same gay and lesbian community center in Los Angeles within a week of each other.
On the Republican side, though, this rapprochement is new.
Bush, so far the run-away favorite in the Republican field, has said he would have no qualms about hiring gays.
``If someone can do a job, and a job that he's qualified for, that person ought to be allowed to do his job,'' he said earlier this year.
McCain, who has appointed Rep.
Jim Kolbe of Arizona, the only openly gay Republican in the House, to his national steering committee, has similarly said he would hire on merit alone.
He has supported anti-hate-crimes legislation that would protect victims of crime not only because of their race but their ``sexual orientation''.
He has said that someday he could envision a gay president.
Mrs. Dole has said she would appoint to her administration anyone who was qualified, emphasizing in an NBC interview in July that ``all people are welcome'' and adding: ``I'm inclusive''.
Of the contribution that her husband spurned in 1996, Mrs.
Dole said that if she received a check from the same group, ``I would not turn it away''.
William Kristol, who was chief of staff to Vice President Dan Quayle and now is editor of the conservative Weekly Standard, said that the mainstream Republican candidates this year were clearly unhappy under the banner of strident, anti-gay language.
``The Republican establishment does not want to fight the conservative culture war,'' Kristol said, ``partly because they think it's a losing fight, but more importantly, they don't believe in it''.
Outside the party establishment, Buchanan and other conservatives remain adamant.
His spokesman, Bob Adams, said Buchanan ``has certainly not abandoned the culture war''.
Some, like Gary Bauer and Alan Keyes, make their rejection of homosexuality a major plank of their platforms.
Bauer said recently that when he heard McCain say the party should be ``a big tent that admits everybody,'' the phrase sounded to him ``like fingernails on a chalkboard''.
Steve Forbes, the wealthy publisher and candidate, flatly opposes any concessions to gay voters.
He frequently says he wants ``equal rights for all, special rights for none''.
Asked if Forbes would appoint an openly gay person to his administration, his campaign manager, Bill Dal Col, said: ``If the person is qualified for the job, that's fine as long as it is not a statement on a life style or promoting a life style''.
As for gay adoptions, Dal Col said: ``There are plenty of heterosexual couples out there,'' and existing laws against hate crimes are enough.
The Rev.
Louis Sheldon, a staunch conservative who heads a national group called the Traditional Values Coalition and who has denounced homosexuals often in his career, denied that there was a trend among Republicans to reach out to gay voters.
Noting that the Republican presidential candidates oppose homosexuals in the military and same-sex marriages, Sheldon said that ``there aren't that many Log Cabin voters out there''.
He added: ``There is nothing immutable about sexual behavior _ it is chosen''.
(STORY CAN END HERE.
OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS) nn Still, anti-gay sentiment is less strident this year.
Many Republicans avoid the matter entirely.
Brian Kennedy, the national political director for former Tennessee Gov.
Lamar Alexander, said: ``He neither brings up those issues in his stump speech nor do we ever recall him being asked about it.
It doesn't seem to be on the radar screen for the '99 cycle''.
Adams, Buchanan's spokesman, agreed.
``It hasn't come up, and we haven't been making it an issue,'' he said.
Even Quayle, a social conservative who has aggressively promoted ``family values,'' has shown moderation toward homosexuals.
Asked on a radio program last month what he would do if one of his children were homosexual, he said he would support them ``whatever they are''.
While he avoided answering specific questions about gays in the military and gay adoptions, Quayle also said: ``Life-style orientation really makes no difference to me at all.
Believe me, I don't inquire what one's sexual preference may or may not be''.
He repeated his view that homosexuality is a choice but did not say, as he did in 1992, that it was ``a wrong choice''.
Kristol said that most Republicans were still being careful in their statements because they did not want to alienate the grass-roots conservatives who believe homosexuality is a sin.
But the candidates' tempered tone, he said, poses a dilemma for conservative voters.
``The question is, do conservatives want to win so badly that they will accept this kind of establishment leadership''? he asked.
``Or have they, too, given up on the culture war?
Do they want a political champion for their views''?
Since gays emerged several years ago as a significant voting bloc, Republicans ceded them to the Democrats.
About 5 percent of voters in 1996 identified themselves in polls of people leaving voting booths as gay _ ``about the same percentage as Hispanics and larger than the Jewish vote,'' said Elizabeth Birch, executive director of the Human Rights Campaign, the nation's largest gay and lesbian lobbying group.
Tafel, who is organizing gay Republican voters this week to participate in the Iowa straw poll and is seeking a slot for an openly gay speaker at the Republican national convention next year, said that the party was finally recognizing the influence of the gay electorate.
``It's the first time we haven't been take for granted'' as likely Democrats, he said.
His group has yet to make an endorsement or give any money to any of the presidential candidates, but it plans to do so closer to next year's convention.
Also making the gay vote more available to Republicans this year is the fact that liberal Democrats have not been entirely happy with the Clinton administration's record on gay issues.
They have complained of a lack of financing for the treatment of AIDS, the opposition to gay marriage and the murky ``don't ask, don't tell'' policy that has allowed a record number of anti-gay discharges from the military.
Such discharges increased 86 percent over the last five years.
Alert to the potential appeal of Republicans who refrain from broad cultural attacks, Democrats are warning that the Republicans are not as tolerant as they may appear.
Pat Ewing, a senior adviser at the Democratic National Committee, said of Bush: ``He is purposefully vague, not moderate.
Bush denied Texans protection from hate crimes and let it be known that he opposed any provision to protect gays and lesbians from these crimes.
His platitudes are meant to obscure''.
Karen Hughes, a spokeswoman for Bush, said he objected to the hate-crimes legislation because ``all violent crime is motivated by hate'' and Texas already has a law that covers such crimes.
But, she said, he also did not believe that sexual orientation should be singled out for special rights.
``He doesn't believe in granting legal rights based on sexual orientation,'' she said.
Gore has made an extra effort to appeal to homosexuals.
In one of his rare departures from Clinton orthodoxy, he has called for a more ``compassionate'' _ though unspecific _ approach to homosexuals in the military.
In California, which is likely to face a ballot initiative next year that outlaws same-sex marriage, Gore said he favored legal protections for same-sex partners, like health benefits and hospital visitation rights, but he opposed ``a change in the institution of marriage as we now know it between men and women''.
He would leave gay adoptions up to adoption professionals on an individual basis, his spokesman, Chris Lahane, said.
Democrats acknowledge that Gore and Bradley have virtually identical records on gay issues.
Eric Hauser, a spokesman for Bradley, said he supported a ``review'' of the ``don't ask, don't tell'' policy on gays in the military.
He also supports gay adoptions and extending legal rights, including health benefits and hospital visitation, to same-sex partners as ``common sense'' measures.
When Bradley was in the Senate, he voted for the so-called defense of marriage act, which said no state had to recognize the same-sex laws of another state.
Likewise, President Clinton signed the bill into law, and Gore ``stood beside him'' in supporting it, Ms.
Birch said.
Although Gore has been outspoken in favor of gay issues, he has also been the target of gay demonstrators.
AIDS activists have cropped up, noisily, at several of his campaign events, accusing him of siding with drug companies and trying to block South Africa's access to cheaper generic drugs to fight HIV.
His staff says this is an international patent issue and is trying to work it out.
PHILADELPHIA _ The content of Rep.
Jim Kolbe's speech on international trade Tuesday night at the Republican National Convention was considerably less compelling than the fact that he gave it at all.
The eight-term representative from Tucson, Ariz.
is the House of Representatives' only openly gay Republican.
His pre-prime-time talk on trade relations might have gone down as yet another unmemorable convention speech.
But Kolbe's appearance itself was remarkable, given the strongly anti-gay platform that Republican delegates approved Monday objecting to any role for gays in the military and to the proposed extension of federal civil rights law to cover homosexuals.
Acting on a request by gay Republicans in April, Texas Gov.
George W.
Bush invited Kolbe to speak at the convention's second evening dedicated to the theme of ``Strength and Security with a Purpose''.
Kolbe told the convention in prepared remarks that if elected president, Bush would expand trade.
``He will work to launch an ambitious new round of global trade talks, and he will enforce trade agreements and trade laws,'' Kolbe said.
Some social conservatives had considered walking out when Kolbe took the podium.
However, Cathie Adams, a Texas delegate from Dallas, said that instead, she would bow her head during the speech to pray for gays to give up their ``unhealthy lifestyle''.
And Tim Wildmon, vice president of the Mississippi-based American Family Association, commented that ``the things that these homosexual advocates push for are contrary to everything that 90 percent of Republicans stand for''.
If any of this fazed Kolbe, 58, he didn't show it.
When the Bush campaign considered inviting him, ``they didn't say well, gee, you'd be the right person to speak about trade, but we can't have you do it because you're an openly gay Republican,''' he said in a brief interview before the speech.
``The fact that it's a non-issue is positive''.
The invitation to speak was seen as an effort by the Bush campaign to show that platform notwithstanding, Bush means what he says about being a ``compassionate conservative''.
Some social conservatives sought to downplay the significance of Kolbe's speech.
``We're pleased with the substance in the platform on the (gay) issue,'' said Charles Donovan, chief executive of the Washington-based Family Research Council.
Still, he added, ``this convention as a whole could send some messages better than it's doing''.
He noted that while a gay person _ Kolbe _ had been given a chance to address the convention, no anti-abortion advocate received the same privilege.
Gay Republicans saw the Kolbe appearance as a historic event.
``He's a living symbol of what an inclusive party is all about,'' said Kevin Ivers, spokesman for Log Cabin Republicans, a gay Republican organization.
Asked whether there is a future for gays in the Republican Party, Kolbe responded: ``Of course there is.
The fact that I'm speaking tonight is evidence of that'' ' $$$
WASHINGTON (AP) --The House came down solidly behind the Boy Scouts Wednesday with a 362-12 vote against a proposal to revoke their eight-decade-old federal charter because of the scouting organization's policy of excluding gays.
Republicans, who brought the legislation to the House floor to show the lack for support for critics of the Scouts, labeled it an attack on American values.
Rep. Cass Ballenger, R-N.C.
, said half the members of the House were former Scouts and would defend an organization ''as American as apple pie and baseball''.
While the bill's opponents accused its few Democratic supporters of extremism, Democrats complained that the GOP's only intent was to embarrass them.
Fifty Democrats and one Republican voted ''present'' in apparent protest of the procedure.
One Republican, Rep.
James Greenwood of Pennsylvania, voted for the bill.
David Smith of the Human Rights Campaign, a leading gay rights organization, said Republicans were ''trying to change the subject from hate crimes to Boy Scouts''.
The GOP leadership is resisting Democratic attempts to pass hate crimes legislation this year.
Beyond the politics, the legislation offered by Rep.
Lynn Woolsey, D-Calif.
, spotlighted the uneasy relationship between the federal government and the Boy Scouts since the organization's stance toward gays became a national issue.
Woolsey said she was a Girl Scout and one of her sons was a Boy Scout.
''We're not saying the Boy Scouts are bad; we're saying that intolerance is bad''.
''I know the value of scouting, and that's why I believe scouting should be available to all boys, not just to some boys,'' Woolsey said during Tuesday night's debate.
She was the only Democrat to speak in favor of the legislation.
In contrast, a long line of Republicans rose to condemn the bill.
''It's an attack on the fundamental values of America,'' said Rep.
Chris Cannon, R-Utah, led by ''a small group of extremists on the minority side''.
But Rep.
John Conyers, D-Mich.
, top Democrat on the Judiciary Committee, said Republicans were engaging in a ''political stunt'' in bringing to the floor a bill that had had no hearings or committee vote and didn't have a chance of passage.
Woolsey said she wasn't told until Monday evening that Republicans were taking up her legislation.
It ''was a total surprise to me''.
''We're disappointed that this bill would even be considered,'' Boy Scouts spokesman Gregg Shields said.
Having a federal charter is an honor and ''we hope to continue to live up to that honor,'' he added.
The Boy Scouts got their federal charter in 1916, six years after it was founded.
It is one of about 90 groups with such designation, an honorary title given to patriotic, charitable and education organizations.
While it confers no specific benefits, receiving a federal charter is a mark of prestige and national recognition for a group.
Among other groups with federal charters are the American Legion, Future Farmers of America, the National Tropical Botanical Garden and the National Ski Patrol.
The Supreme Court in a 5-4 decision in June, upheld the Boy Scouts' ban on homosexuals serving as troop leaders.
That ruling may also give legal backing to the 6.2 million-member organization's rejection of gay youths as members.
The Scouts asserted that homosexual conduct is inconsistent with the values it seeks to instill.
Separately in June, President Clinton issued an executive order barring discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation in federally conducted education and training programs.
The Interior Department in August asked the Justice Department for guidance on how that order affected the holding of Boy Scout Jamborees on federal lands.
GOP presidential nominee George W.
Bush and other Republicans quickly accused the Clinton administration of trying to throw the scouts off federal lands.
But Attorney General Janet Reno, in a statement this month, said the tradition of Boy Scouts using federal lands for camping and other activities could continue.
After the June Supreme Court ruling, Clinton said he is ''generally against discrimination against gays''.
But he refused to criticize the Scouts or the court's ruling.
''The Boy Scouts still are --they're a great group.
They do a lot of good''.
----- The bill number is H.R. 4892.
On the Net: The Boy Scouts: http://www.bsa.scouting.org/ Rep.
Lynn Woolsey: http://www.house.gov/woolsey/
SACRAMENTO _ Exposing a deep political fissure in the Republican party, UC Regent Ward Connerly and several other prominent GOP party members announced their opposition Thursday to Proposition 22, a measure on the March 7 ballot that would ban gay marriage.
The initiative, which was put on the ballot by state Sen.
William ``Pete'' Knight, R-Palmdale, is broadly supported by state Republicans.
But Connerly, who led the campaign for the anti-affirmative action Proposition 209, said gay rights are a matter of personal freedom and not an area where the government should be involved.
``I support two people having the right to do whatever they want to do,'' said Connerly.
Thursday's statement by Connerly, GOP Senate candidate Tom Campbell, and state Assemblyman Jim Cunneen, R-San Jose, comes on the heels of several other public battles within the Republican Party.
Only last year, for example, a splinter group of moderate state Republicans held an alternative convention to adopt a pro-choice platform.
The statement also comes as leaders are hoping the rank and file will unite behind the party's candidates.
In less than two weeks, the state GOP will meet in Burlingame to adopt a party platform.
``What you are seeing is symptomatic of the problems the party has had for the past five years,'' said GOP consultant Mike Madrid.
``The base of the party has remained unchanged, while the demographics in California have changed dramatically.
``The question is, how do you broaden the base of the party when the core is so intense on certain key issues''?
Madrid said.
Supporters of Proposition 22 deny that there is any division among Republicans, citing the support of the California Republican Party and 56 GOP members of the Legislature and congressional delegation.
``I'm not at all surprised to see the author of Prop.
209, one of the most divisive measures ever introduced against Latinos, has chosen to join forces with a campaign against marriage,'' said Julio Calderon, a spokesman for the proposition, citing a survey showing 67 percent of Latino voters support Proposition 22.
But the president of the California Republican League, a group that promotes inclusion in the party, said such issues hurt Republicans.
``There is this notion that we put this stuff on the ballot as a `wedge' issue and promote wedge-issue politics _ it feeds the notion that Republicans are into dividing people,'' said Gary Zlotnick, the league's president.
Connerly also said Republicans suffer from their public image.
``We may have a more difficult time than the Democrats because some think it is written somewhere that we should oppress gays,'' he said.
``Some people invoke the Bible and don't think it through.
But Democrats come out against the initiative and then dance around the real issues''.
Both Democratic presidential hopefuls, Vice President Al Gore and former Sen.
Bill Bradley, have come out against the initiative but oppose same-sex marriage.
AUSTIN, Texas _ Because the Texas House race between Democratic incumbent Glen Maxey and Republican challenger Fred Ebner is the first in Texas history to feature two openly gay candidates, you'd think the two men would find it difficult to feud over the issue of sexual orientation.
But the campaign for Austin's District 51 has taken a strange turn in its final days: Ebner and other gay Republicans are accusing Maxey _ the only openly gay member of the Texas House and an outspoken gay rights advocate _ of gay-baiting.
Maxey, meanwhile, says Ebner is misleading voters about his sexual orientation.
A recent campaign mailing by Maxey sparked the controversy.
The leaflet points out that Ebner is gay, highlights his membership in the Log Cabin Republicans, a gay group, and notes his support for expanding the state's anti-discrimination laws to include sexual orientation.
It also points out that Ebner is pro-choice and supports the legalization of marijuana for medicinal purposes.
Maxey ``supports these issues too,'' the leaflet says, but unlike Ebner, Maxey ``will tell you where he stands''.
It doesn't say that Maxey is gay.
Ebner and the Log Cabin Republicans say the leaflet appears to have been sent only to people who voted in the Republican primary, and was intended to dampen GOP turnout by highlighting Ebner's sexual orientation and some of his socially moderate stands.
Maxey declined to identify the target audience.
``I would like very much for him to have distributed the same thing in Clarksville and Travis Heights,'' said Ebner, referring to two neighborhoods that are particularly liberal in a district that is among the most Democratic in the state.
``I'd like them to know that he's indulging in gay-bashing in order to win''.
Ebner said he considers his sexuality to be ``a private and personal matter which is irrelevant to holding public office,'' while Maxey has ``made a lifetime career of advocating a left/liberal approach to gay issues''.
Maxey said he sent the mailing because Ebner attacks him for being a gay advocate when he speaks to broader audiences, but tells gay groups that he can better represent their interests.
He said the leaflet didn't mention that he was gay because it is already well-known.
Maxey said he isn't gay-baiting because it was Ebner who injected sexual orientation into the campaign.
``I've heard him twice now call me a professional gay activist,'' Maxey said.
``He's put up by the Log Cabin Republicans, a gay group, and then criticizes me for being a gay activist?
Give me a break''.
Maxey said the Log Cabin Republicans recruited Ebner to ``spit in the eye'' of the Republican party by showing that a gay, socially moderate Republican could do better against Maxey than an anti-gay conservative one.
The platform of the Texas Republican Party states that homosexuality ``is contrary to the fundamental, unchanging truths that have been ordained by God'' and opposes gay marriage and the repeal of sodomy laws.
The Log Cabin Republicans deny they recruited Ebner, who ran for Austin City Council in 1987.
Steve Labinski, who is president of the group's Texas chapter, dismissed the idea that Ebner's campaign is designed to send a message to the Republican Party.
He said Ebner ``honestly believes that a mainstream Republican can better represent the voters of District 51 than Glen Maxey''.
``The mailout was identical to a mailout that would be sent by the Christian Coalition or the Texas Family Association for the same purpose: to inflame voter homophobia''.
Labinski said.
``This is gay-baiting''.
Dianne Hardy-Garcia of the Lesbian Gay Rights Lobby of Texas, which doesn't endorse candidates, questioned why a gay Republican would want to target an outspoken defender of gay rights.
She said the leaflet was ``hard-hitting, and a little bit harsh,'' but declined to describe it as gay-baiting.
``Glen's borne the brunt of being a gay politician in this state for a long time, so I imagine that he's frustrated about Ebner not being open about it,'' she said.
``Maybe there will be a day when sexual orientation won't make a difference and I look forward to that day.
But it hasn't happened yet, and no one knows that more than Glen Maxey''.
Story Filed By Cox Newspapers For Use By Clients of the New York Times News Service
Forget all that stuff about hating the sin but loving the sinner.
House Republicans are about to go after the sinners.
A vote is imminent on a provision supported by the leadership, and thus likely to pass, that would cancel President Clinton's recent executive order barring discrimination against gays and lesbians who work for the government.
Most federal agencies already had nondiscriminatory policies, though with slight differences here and there.
The main effect of Clinton's order is to impose uniformity, so what's the big deal?
The big deal is that in its thralldom to the religious right and its increasing tilt to ideological rather than to pragmatic conservatism, the Republican Party has gone from being just a little cracked about homosexuality to being outright peculiar.
Commonly cited as evidence of that have been the recent declarations by Senate and House Majority Leaders Trent Lott and Dick Armey that homosexuality is a sin, but both men were only answering questions they didn't seem pleased to have been asked and sin is a religious, not a political, judgment.
They are welcome to it.
(Though Lott also seemed to think homosexuality is a mental disorder or an addiction.
The American Psychiatric Association concluded otherwise 25 years ago, in effect finding that most folks are heterosexual but a few are not and there you are).
Far more disturbing is the worsening demagoguery of the party and its candidates in demonizing gays and lesbians as a shortcut to office.
Here's the U.S.
House of Representatives on the verge of all but endorsing job discrimination against gays and lesbians by disallowing an order forbidding that.
The Texas Republican Party recently denied recognition at its convention to the Log Cabin Republicans, a sobersided club of gay Republicans.
And when the group complained, delegates unleashed a torrent of abuse, with state leaders comparing it to the Ku Klux Klan.
Lott is blocking the appointment of a gay as ambassador to Luxembourg.
(In the course of which issue Sen.
James Inhofe, R-Okla.
, likened the nominee to the former KKK Grand Wizard David Duke.
Klan analogies apparently are going around).
This year's GOP gubernatorial primary in Nebraska sank into a contest in homophobia, with candidates competing in the vigor of their oaths to block homosexual marriage, which the conservative state legislature has never even considered.
Republican primaries in South Carolina, too, have set off a bidding war in anti-gay rhetoric, most bizarrely with a would-be agriculture commissioner declaring homosexuality a threat to family farms.
``You can't have farming based on having Bob and Bob being married,'' said Jim Gordon.
All this posturing is put about as a defense of morality but it is no such thing.
Republican candidates in many places no longer can win without certification from fundamentalist Christian pulpits, and as one GOP ally put it, when Republicans are quoting the Bible and Democrats are citing the American Psychiatric Association, Republicans win.
Count on it: When politics is talking about saving souls, it is thinking about counting heads.
E-mail: teepencolumn(at)coxnews.com Story Filed By Cox Newspapers For Use By Clients of the New York Times News Service
WASHINGTON _ In an intriguing campaign dance, John McCain has collected tens of thousands of dollars in contributions from members of a gay Republican group with whom he disagrees on a broad range of issues, from job-discrimination protection to benefits for same-sex couples.
The Log Cabin Republicans, whose spokesmen praised McCain's willingness ``to have a dialogue,'' have chosen to help him despite his disagreement with them on matters such as the decision Monday by the Vermont Supreme Court that homosexual couples are entitled to the same benefits as wedded couples.
McCain spokesman Dan Schnur told ``The Arizona Republic'' that the senator ``has indicated that he disagrees with the decision'' by the Vermont court.
McCain also backs the ``Don't ask, don't tell'' policy on gays in the military, putting him at odds with Steve May, a prominent Log Cabin Republican supporter in Phoenix who is threatened with an Army discharge because of his sexual orientation.
Yet on Dec.
14, McCain's campaign manager, Rick Davis, simultaneously addressed members of the Log Cabin Republicans by satellite television at fund-raisers in Boston, Chicago, Minneapolis, New Orleans, New York, Seattle and Washington, D.C., and raised about $40,000 for the campaign.
Phoenix was not included because many members there had already contributed to McCain.
The relationship between the senator and gay Republicans was noted earlier this month in the ``Washington Blade,'' a gay newspaper that labeled McCain an ``enigma''.
``While he has an avowed `visceral dislike' of discrimination, which presumably includes discrimination against gays, he has consistently chosen to vote anti-gay.
His actions over the years have likewise sent mixed messages to gay voters,'' the newspaper said.
In 1996, McCain helped ensure the defeat of a bill, which lost on a 50-49 vote, that would have barred employment discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation.
Three years earlier, McCain was denounced by the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force for agreeing to be keynote speaker at a fund-raiser for an Oregon group that sponsored a ballot initiative condemning homosexuality as ``perverse''.
His aides said at the time that McCain's appearance didn't constitute an endorsement of the group's views and that McCain considered tolerance a ``bedrock value''.
The plan to hold the joint December fund-raisers was the brainchild of May, an openly gay Army reservist and state lawmaker who says he supports and admires McCain but disagrees with him on the policy permitting gays to serve in the military only as long as their sexual orientation is not disclosed.
Citing the policy, the Army is moving to discharge May, who has been open about his sexual orientation since he first ran for office in 1996.
May was honorably discharged in 1995, recalled this year, and is now appealing to end what he calls the ``ludicrous'' policy that threatens his service even though he has earned stellar performance evaluations.
Last week, May's sister, unbeknownst to May, asked McCain about the ``Don't ask, don't tell'' policy during the question-and-answer portion of a speech the senator was giving at Harvard University.
McCain told Shannon May, a Harvard senior, that if there were problems with the policy, they should be looked into.
But he repeated his support for the policy, saying, according to the Associated Press: ``Colin Powell, Norman Schwarzkopf, all the military leaders I admire, came up with it''.
Steve May sounded disappointed in an interview immediately after he heard about McCain's response.
``I guess McCain basically hid behind Generals Powell and Schwarzkopf, didn't really want to address the question,'' he said.
``I really admire his leadership.
He's a man I want in the Oval Office.
But I just hope that he is really willing to examine the immorality, impracticality and absurdity of this (policy)''.
McCain recently told moderator Tony Snow on ``Fox News Sunday,'' ``I want to sit down with (May), and look at the specifics of his case''.
A meeting has been scheduled for Dec.
30 in Phoenix, according to May.
``I hope McCain's not saying he's going to meet with me so he can deflect the issue.
We never had a meeting scheduled until Tony Snow asked him if he was going to meet with me,'' May said.
McCain was campaigning in South Carolina and could not be interviewed, his campaign said.
But Schnur, McCain's spokesman, said, ``The Steve May story broke over a weekend.
Upon hearing about it, Senator McCain indicated that he wanted to meet with May to find out the particulars of the way the case was handled.
Logistically, it wouldn't have been possible for him to arrange the meeting before Snow asked him about it''.
Schnur said that although McCain might disagree with Log Cabin Republicans on some issues, they were in agreement on such things as ``lower taxes and a strong national defense''.
In contrast to GOP presidential front-runner George W.
Bush, who has thus far declined the group's invitation, McCain sat down with members of the Log Cabin Republicans last month and said that he would work to end discrimination, and that appears to be enough for many gay Republicans, particularly when the senator's position is compared with those of other presidential candidates.
``You're talking about those kind of values (McCain's) versus people like Pat Buchanan, Gary Bauer and others who have historically said that gays should not be in the Republican Party, that we are people who should not have civil rights, that we should be in programs because we're mentally ill,'' said Kevin Ivers, the Log Cabin group's spokesman.
Bush said on ``Meet the Press'' last month that he would ``probably not'' meet with the group, adding, ``I am someone who is a uniter, not a divider.
I don't believe in group thought, pitting one group against another''.
Log Cabin members said they were confused by Bush's remarks, and some wondered whether he might be fearful of repercussions from the right.
Southern lawmakers in particular were incensed at President Clinton's proposal early in his first term to lift the ban on gays in the military.
When the plan was subjected to harsh congressional criticism, Clinton modified it into what became popularly known as ``Don't ask, don't tell''.
South Carolina's February primary is central to McCain's campaign strategy, and he could be subject to attacks from religious conservatives if they believed he had gone too far in including gays under the Republican ``big tent''. &QL;
PHILADELPHIA _ Homosexual Republicans rejoiced, but religious conservative delegates sat in silent protest Tuesday as their party's only openly gay congressman addressed the Republican National Convention.
Rep. Jim Kolbe of Arizona did not mention sexual orientation in his three-minute speech on free trade.
But gay delegates and their supporters said his presence on the podium in prime time was proof that presidential candidate George W.
Bush is serious about making the GOP more inclusive.
The gay Republicans are also heartened that the GOP presidential campaign seems to be welcoming Mary Cheney, 31, the openly lesbian daughter of vice-presidential pick Dick Cheney.
She appeared with her father in the convention hall on Monday night to the cheers of the delegates.
``It's a pretty vivid reminder that gays are part of the American family,'' said Kevin Ivers, communications director for the Log Cabin Republicans.
``We're thrilled,'' David Catania, an openly gay delegate and councilman from the District of Columbia, said of Kolbe's speech.
``This is something that means a great deal to gay Republicans''.
But other delegates disapproved of Bush's choice.
``It gives the opportunity for radical gay rights advocates to claim victory for their agenda,'' Texas GOP chair Susan Weddington told the Associated Press.
Dozens of delegates in the Texas delegation sat with their heads bowed and eyes closed as Kolbe spoke.
One held up a sign saying, ``There is a way out''.
The Republican platform opposes gay marriages, gays in the military and express legal protection for sexual orientation.
Applause for Kolbe was restrained in comparison to the raucous reception given to most speakers.
The muted reaction was as close to dissention as the convention has come in two evenings devoted to showing a new, more tolerant face of the GOP.
After years of political rejection, gay Republicans and their backers said the choice of Kolbe as a convention speaker furthered the message of inclusion that Bush is sending through the convention.
``We're happy to see changes taking place at our convention,'' said Rich Tafel, executive director of the Log Cabin Republicans.
In 1992, there were two openly gay GOP delegates, he recalled, while this year there are 18 to 20.
``This is a party that's trying to expand its base,'' said Catania, who was among a dozen gay Republicans who met with Bush in Austin in April.
That meeting ended with disagreement on a lot of issues, he conceded, ``but the governor agreed to keep an open mind''.
``It's a great step in the right direction,'' said Fred Ronstadt, Linda's cousin and a Tucson city councilman whose wife works on Kolbe's campaign.
``Our party needs to be inclusive''.
At a reception sponsored by the Log Cabin Republicans, Kolbe stressed he was chosen to speak because of his economic views and not his private life.
``I never knew there was such an interest in trade by the media,'' joked Kolbe, as TV crews jostled for position in the packed room.
``I want to thank Governor Bush for sending a message of inclusion because I had been a McCain supporter''.
Kolbe, 58, acknowledged being gay in 1996, but has not been an outspoken activist on gay issues.
As chairman of an Appropriations subcommittee, he has led overseas trade missions.
In recent sessions, he pushed for approval of the North American Free Trade Agreement and permanent normal trade relations with China.
For the convention, ``he was well chosen to be the spokesman for free trade,'' said Rep.
Connie Morella, R-Md.
Bob Dart's e-mail address is bobdart(at)coxnews.com ENDIT Story Filed By Cox Newspapers For Use By Clients of the New York Times News Service
WASHINGTON _ Gay Republicans strongly opposed to elements of the party's platform are running into roadblocks erected by social conservatives who on Tuesday vowed to defend language opposing same-sex marriages and homosexual service in the military.
Representatives of the Traditional Values Coalition and the Family Research Council, both conservative bastions of opposition to gay rights, met Tuesday with Wisconsin Gov.
Tommy Thompson, chairman of the GOP committee that gathers in Philadelphia later this week to hash out they party's platform.
``We felt good about overall tenor of meeting, and it did sound as if (the platform committee) would address some of our major concerns,'' said Marty Dannenfelser, the Family Research Council's vice president for public affairs.
``They don't want to sound harsh.
We're trying to work with them to find a way to do that''.
Gay Republicans ``want to neuter the platform so that next time they can come in and say homosexual marriage is OK and gays in the military are OK,'' said Andrea Sheldon, executive director of the Traditional Values Coalition.
A platform that does not oppose gay rights would be ``a defeat for pro-Christian, pro-family voters who are inclined to vote conservative Republican''.
As is the case with other contentious social issues such as abortion, the gay rights issue is something of a thorn in the side of Republicans and their presidential hopeful, Texas Gov.
George W.
Bush. On the one hand, Bush is intent on reaching out to voting blocs such as Hispanics that have not traditionally been courted by Republicans.
On the other hand, reaching out to gays would cost him critical support from social conservatives.
In the short run, the social conservatives want to block efforts to eliminate the 1996 platform's stand against giving gays protection under civil rights laws.
The Log Cabin Republicans, an association of gay Republicans, and their supporters want to excise language favoring a ban on gays in the military, and supporting the 1996 Defense of Marriage Act, which permits states not to recognize same-sex marriages performed in other states.
The dispute goes into its final stages this Friday and Saturday when the GOP platform committee hashes out the final draft of the party's 2000 platform in Philadelphia.
Republicans attending the convention then vote on the platform on Monday.
Win or lose, gay Republicans say they give the Bush campaign high marks for steering the party away from a confrontational tone.
Hostility to gays, for instance, surfaced in the 1992 GOP convention when conservative candidate Patrick Buchanan called for a ``cultural war'' against advocates of gay rights and abortion rights.
``There's no doubt in my mind there's effort by the Bush camp to send a message,'' said Rich Tafel, executive director of Log Cabin Republicans, noting that for the first time an openly gay member of Congress, Rep.
Jim Kolbe, R-Ariz.
, will address the convention.
``We appreciate their efforts.
We understand it's a hassle for them''.
The 1996 GOP platform states: ``We reject the distortion of (civil rights) laws to cover sexual preference, and we endorse the Defense of Marriage Act to prevent states from being forced to recognize same-sex unions''.
It also says: ``We oppose Bill Clinton's assault on the culture and traditions of the Armed Forces, especially his attempt to lift the ban on homosexuals in the military.
We affirm that homosexuality is incompatible with military service''.
In line with Bush's effort to reach out, Thompson met with the Log Cabin Republicans earlier this month.
Thompson's spokesman, Kevin Keane, did not hold out much hope for the gay Republican strategy.
``It all comes down to the 107 (platform committee) delegates who vote on what's in, and what's not in, the platform,'' he said.
``I suspect it'll be tough to change anything because the 107 delegates are from the more conservative end of spectrum''.
&QL; (STORY CAN END HERE.
OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS).
&QL; &QL; Bush himself met with 12 prominent gay Republicans in April and declared himself ``a better person'' for having listened to their pleas for greater inclusion in the GOP ranks.
Still Bush did not change his views, which run mostly parallel to the 1996 GOP platform.
The gays in the military issue is an exception.
Bush has said he supports the military's ``don't ask, don't tell'' policy that permits gays in the military as long as they don't engage in homosexual activity, and he opposes a return to a total ban on gays in uniform.
Still, Tafel said gay Republicans are trying to look past the Republican platform debate to the convention itself and Bush's campaign against Vice President Al Gore.
``Some language unites and some pushes people out, and my sense is (Bush) wants language that unites,'' Tafel said.
``The language there now doesn't do that.
But at the same time it's not something the (Bush campaign) completely controls''.
&UR; &QL; (Dan Freedman can be reached at 202-298-6920 or at the e-mail address dan(at)hearstdc.com).
PHILADELPHIA _ As Republicans wrapped up their convention intended to highlight inclusiveness, gay political organizations squared off Thursday over whether the party has a newfound moderation toward homosexuals.
Leaders of the nation's largest gay political organization said the GOP national convention demonstrated ``meanness'' toward gays and that the election of presidential nominee George W.
Bush and his running mate Dick Cheney would be a setback for gay rights.
``The verdict is in,'' Winnie Stachelberg, political director for the Human Rights Campaign, said as Bush prepared to deliver his acceptance speech.
``A Bush-Cheney administration has the potential to be very harmful for gays and lesbians.
... It is clear that the kinder, gentler face we see at the convention is nothing more than a facade''.
Elizabeth Birch, the group's executive director, said that the four-day affair was disappointing, even though the GOP sought to soften hard-line opposition to homosexual rights by allowing Rep.
Jim Kolbe, R-Ariz.
, to address delegates.
Kolbe is openly gay.
The gay rights officials spoke at a news conference in Washington, D.C.
The Human Rights Campaign already has endorsed Vice President Al Gore for president.
Birch said she was ```very disturbed'' by the GOP platform, which included language gay Republicans wanted removed.
Birch said ``a kind of meanness won out'' when the platform was finalized on Monday.
The platform defines marriage ``as the legal union of one man and one woman''.
It says that ``federal judges and bureaucrats should not force states to recognize other living arrangements as marriages''.
And the platform further says that homosexuals should be exempt from anti-discrimination laws and that homosexuality is incompatible with military service.
Stachelberg said a low point for gays at the Republican convention was on Tuesday as Kolbe spoke to delegates in a four-minute speech on international trade.
Several members of Bush's own Texas delegation removed their cowboy hats and bowed their heads in prayer.
Birch noted the irony of the Republican position, saying that Cheney's daughter Mary is openly lesbian.
``The presence of Mary Cheney as an openly lesbian person shines a light on the fact that George W.
Bush and Dick Cheney have positions of grave concern to gay and lesbian people in this country,'' Birch said.
But Kevin Ivers, a spokesman for the Log Cabin Republicans, the country's largest organization for gay Republicans, said despite the Kolbe incident and the platform, the convention was by far the most successful ever for homosexual Republicans.
Ivers said that the ``old social conservative paradigm'' in the Republican party this week ``is showing signs that is is crumbling''.
''We've seen real advances this week,`` he said, pointing to a platform committee that had initially removed the anti-gay language, only to be overruled by conservatives.
The fact that Kolbe was asked to speak by Bush was a significant attempt at reaching out to gay Republicans, he said, adding that most of the 2,066 convention delegates applauded Kolbe heartily.
One other indication that the party is warming to gays: there were more openly gay convention delegates (19) to this GOP convention than at any previous.
There were five gay delegates in 1996 and two alternates in 1992, Ivers said.
``This week was a success.
We are at a turning point (in the Republican Party) on gay and lesbian issues,'' Ivers said.
Bush's relationship with gays and lesbians has been strained.
During the Republican primaries, Bush at first refused to meet with gay rights groups.
But in April, he met with gay Republicans saying afterwards that he was ``a better man'' for it.
Republicans also note that Cheney, while secretary of defense in 1991, supported his spokesman, Pete Williams, when he announced he was gay.
``I have operated on the basis, over the years, with respect to my personal staff that I don't ask them about their private lives.
... As long as they perform their professional responsibilities in a responsible manner, their private lives are their business,'' Cheney said. $$$
AUSTIN, Texas _ Republican presidential front-runner George W.
Bush has vowed to bring minority groups into the GOP fold.
But members of one minority group _ gays and lesbians _ still aren't sure whether Bush's emphasis on inclusiveness includes them.
During a recent debate, Bush said he would appoint people based on their qualifications, not their sexual orientation.
But he has refused to meet with the Log Cabin Republicans, a gay GOP group.
Gay-rights advocates hold positions in the Bush campaign.
But the governor promised a group of Christian conservatives that as president he wouldn't appoint people who espouse a homosexual lifestyle.
Bush's mixed signals reflect the complexities of cultivating a relationship with the gay community.
If he embraces it, Bush could lose Christian conservative votes in the GOP primaries or, in the general election, against a socially conservative third-party candidate such as Pat Buchanan.
But exit polls suggest that gay voters make up about 5 percent of the electorate _ about the same as Hispanics _ and they are concentrated in electoral-vote-rich states such as California, New York, Illinois and Florida.
Conceding so many votes to the Democrats could be politically perilous.
``There are lots of gay people who by tradition and heritage would be much more at home in the Republican Party, were it not for things like George Bush being embarrassed to be seen with homosexuals,'' said Kenneth Sherrill, a political science professor at Hunter College in New York City who studies gay rights issues.
As the country becomes increasingly tolerant of homosexuality, Bush's lukewarm attitude may alienate heterosexual voters as well, Sherrill said.
``This strikes me as a classic example of what happens when a candidate adopts a strategy that's designed to win the nomination, even at the cost of losing the election,'' he said.
In contrast, Vice President Al Gore and former New Jersey Sen.
Bill Bradley haven't been bashful about courting the gay vote, which could be especially critical in their fight for the Democratic nomination.
People who identify themselves as gay make up between 8 percent and 9 percent of the Democratic electorate nationwide, and slightly more in the crucial primary states of New York and California.
In a recent debate, both Democrats argued that the current ``don't ask, don't tell'' policy on gays in the military isn't working and that gays should be allowed to serve openly.
Gore and Bradley are cognizant of polls that show 70 percent of Americans support that view, although 76 percent of senior military officers oppose it.
Furthermore, in the wake of several high-profile murders of gays, people are increasingly sensitive to the dangers of discrimination.
Even the Rev.
Jerry Falwell, the Virginia preacher who founded the Moral Majority, has called for an end to anti-gay rhetoric.
During a recent GOP debate, several Republican candidates said gays should be banned from the military and characterized them as immoral.
But Bush and his closest rival, Sen.
John McCain of Arizona, declined to criticize homosexuality and said they support the current policy.
Unlike Bush, however, McCain met with the Log Cabin Republicans.
Asked during a television interview to explain his refusal to meet with the group, Bush said he didn't believe in ``group thought'' or ``pitting one group of people against another''.
Many were puzzled by that explanation, given that Bush frequently meets with other political and interest groups.
Bush spokesman Scott McClellan shed little light on that response, saying Bush refused to meet with the Log Cabin Republicans because they politicize gay issues.
``He does not believe in politicizing the issue, and this is a group that wants to politicize it,'' McClellan said.
He added that Bush didn't see the point of meeting with the group because he disagrees with its positions.
Nor would the Bush campaign say whether the governor agrees with the Texas GOP's platform position on gays and lesbians, which is that ``homosexual behavior is contrary to the fundamental, unchanging truths that have been ordained by God''.
Instead, campaign spokeswoman Mindy Tucker said that Bush believes that ``it's not his place to judge other people''.
Bush's Texas legislative record also is open to interpretation.
Rep. Glen Maxey, the only openly gay member of the Texas Legislature, describes Bush as ``pretty benign'' because whatever his policy positions, he hasn't resorted to anti-gay rhetoric.
``He's not a Jesse Helms,'' Maxey (D-Austin) said in a reference to the conservative North Carolina senator.
``But at a time when there's a tremendous rise in hate crimes, and discrimination in the workplace still abounds, the fact that a leader would not see gay and lesbian issues as important or take a position one way or the other is troubling to me''.
When state lawmakers last year proposed a bill barring gays and lesbians from adopting children in state custody, Bush said he believed that children were better off in homes with traditional couples.
But the state already favors such arrangements, and Bush wouldn't say whether he supported the bill, which would have removed children from gay and lesbian homes.
The legislation never reached his desk.
Bush also declined to take a firm position last year on a hate-crimes bill that would have listed homosexuals as a protected group.
He argued that all violent crimes are hate crimes and noted that Texas already has a hate-crimes law, albeit one that doesn't specify who is protected.
Bush promised to consider the latest version if lawmakers approved it, but he declined to help break the legislative deadlock that eventually killed the proposal.
Gay rights groups suspected that the bill's protection of gays was behind his failure to support the bill, but Bush denied the charge.
Like presidential candidates from both parties, Bush opposes same-sex marriages.
The Democrats want to guarantee legal and financial benefits to gay and lesbian partnerships, but they maintain that marriage is a religious and cultural institution reserved for a man and a woman.
``Bush has had a fair record, and many gays believe he's been a good governor.
But he does need to move more on some gay political issues,'' said Steve Labinski, who heads the Texas branch of the Log Cabin Republicans.
Gay Texas Republicans note that during the party's 1998 convention, Bush urged the GOP to allow the state's Log Cabin Republicans, who had been banned from setting up a booth, to do so.
Maxey suspects that some of Bush's positions are the result of political considerations rather than his personal views.
He points to a conversation he had with Bush last spring on the floor of the Texas House.
Maxey said the governor told him his stance on the gay adoption bill had nothing to do with his view of Maxey, whom he ``valued as a person''.
Based on that talk, Maxey believes that Bush is a lot more tolerant of gays than his record might indicate.
Bush, however, said later that the two discussed children's health insurance, not homosexuality.
Members of the Madison Project, a conservative political action committee, came away from a September meeting with Bush with a different impression than Maxey.
Michael Farris, the chairman of the group, said he asked Bush about his comment that he wouldn't fire an aide he discovered to be gay.
Farris was reassured by Bush's response.
``He said I'm not going to appoint people who are open advocates of the homosexual lifestyle because their policies aren't likely to be my policies on issues,'' Farris said.
Openly gay people serve on some of Bush's state steering committees, but Farris said he is not bothered by that because the panels are mostly honorary.
Furthermore, Farris believes that Bush has genuinely conservative views ``in his heart'' about homosexuality.
Gay Republicans hope Farris is wrong and that Bush is simply doing what he must to win the GOP primaries.
They say he may be more receptive to gays once he's the nominee.
Kevin Ivers, a spokesman for the national Log Cabin Republicans, said Bush should be well aware of the importance of creating a tolerant image for the GOP in the general election.
Ivers argues that Buchanan's anti-gay remarks at the 1992 Republican convention tarnished the party, helping to seal the failure of President George Bush's re-election bid.
``How the Republican Party deals with gays and lesbians is an indication of how it's going to deal with this persistent problem they have of being labeled as intolerant,'' Ivers said.
``The gay issue is the most hot-button issue of all the minority issues in this election''.
For in-depth reporting, opinion and cartoonists, visit the Cox News Campaign 2000 Web site: http://www.coxnews.com/2000.
Story Filed By Cox Newspapers For Use By Clients of the New York Times News Service
WASHINGTON _ House Republican leaders, nervous about possible anti-homosexual remarks during floor debate on anti-gay legislation, said Thursday that they have devised a strategy to smother any fiery rhetoric on the issue.
They hope to convert the debate over an anti-gay proposal into a dignified discussion about presidential powers.
And they will limit the entire debate to 20 minutes.
The touchy legislation, sponsored by Rep.
Joel Hefley, R-Colo.
, would nullify an executive order issued in May by President Clinton that bars federal agencies from discriminating against gays.
The Republican leadership in the House has combined the Hefley proposal with legislation to nullify another executive order expanding federal jurisdiction at the expense of state and local governments.
The result: a dry-as-dust constitutional debate about states rights rather than a potentially emotional confrontation over the hot-button issue of gay rights.
The planned debate is expected as early as Monday.
Rep. Barney Frank, D-Mass.
, an acknowledged homosexual, said the brevity of the scheduled debate ``shows how embarrassed (the Republicans) are by this''.
``This is a very oppressive, outrageous and undemocratic way to talk about things,'' Frank said.
But Rep.
John Linder, R-Ga.
, who said it was his idea to blur the debate over Hefley's amendment, said 20 minutes of debate was more than enough time.
``I think five minutes is plenty on this issue,'' Linder said.
As chairman of the National Republican Congressional Committee responsible for helping elect House Republicans this November, Linder said he ``did not want to see a debate on the floor over the gay issue''.
``I'm hoping to see the debate be on the broader issue of executive orders,'' Linder said.
Rep. Jim Kolbe, R-Ariz.
, the only openly gay House Republican, agreed with Linder that an all-out debate on gay rights made him squeamish.
Koble said he was ``not anxious for a long debate on this''.
``The debate is not going to be terribly pleasant,'' Kolbe said.
``I don't think anybody's mind is going to be changed by it''.
Frank said Republican leaders resorted to the bundling tactic because they realized there wasn't sufficient support among House members for Hefley's anti-homosexual amendment if it stood alone.
``The Hefley amendment became the damsel in distress,'' Frank said.
``They're trying to use the other one to rescue Hefley''.
Rep. Gerald B.H.
Solomon, R-N.Y.
, chairman of the House Rules Committee, said GOP leaders decided to combine the proposals because they both deal with what Republicans claim is Clinton's abuse of executive orders to circumvent Congress.
But Winnie Stachelberg, political director of the gay advocacy group the Human Rights Campaign, said ``the Republicans sensed defeat and then they backtracked''.
``Gay and lesbian issues are not a recipe for defeat'' for Republicans, Stachelberg said.
``I think those who support equality for gays and lesbians are more appealing to voters back home.
Voters want their members to treat people fairly and not to discriminate''.
Some Republicans agreed with those sentiments.
Rep. Christopher Shays, R-Conn.
, who isn't shy about taking potshots at the GOP leadership, said in an interview he has been ``offended'' by his party's efforts to push through the Hefley amendment.
``This amendment is designed to placate our so-called base,'' Shays said, referring to conservative Christian groups opposed to homosexuality.
``I am being more and more offended by what people feel our base is.
I am pretty determined to speak out against any statement that goes after gays and tries to dehumanize them for the purpose of gilding our base.
That is wrong''.
Rep. Mark Foley, R-Fla.
, said the Hefley amendment ``comes off as mean-spirited,'' adding: ``I saw this as a potentially explosive issue.''
WASHINGTON (AP) --President Clinton has renominated James Hormel as ambassador to Luxembourg, and a White House official said Tuesday the administration hopes ``fairness will prevail'' in the new Congress so he can be approved for the job.
The Senate last year refused to vote on the nomination of Hormel after several conservative Republicans accused him of promoting homosexual views.
The White House accused lawmakers of prejudice.
Hormel, who is gay, was approved by the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, but Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott, R-Miss.
, didn't allow his nomination to come to the floor in the face of scattered GOP objections.
Barry Toiv, a White House spokesman, expressed confidence Hormel would be approved by the full Senate this year because a majority back the 66-year-old San Francisco philanthropist and heir to the Hormel Meat Co.
``We had the support of over 60 senators for the nomination in the last Congress and we felt that it was unfair that his nomination was not brought to the floor for a vote,'' Toiv said.
``But we are hopeful that in the new Congress fairness will prevail and he will have a chance to have his nomination voted up or down.
He is very well-qualified''.
Hormel's renomination was first reported in Tuesday's editions of the San Francisco Chronicle.
Toiv said Hormel was among a number of renominations Clinton submitted to the new Congress, which began its work this month.
If approved, Hormel would be the first openly gay U.S. envoy.
Christian right groups had attacked Hormel, a vocal supporter of gay rights and AIDS causes, over his sponsorship of a gay and lesbian center at the San Francisco Public Library that bears his name.
Republican critics called some of the material obscene and feared Hormel might promote a ``gay agenda'' as ambassador to the tiny European nation.
In a letter to the Senate last year, however, Hormel said he had no control over the books in the library and he rejected the notion he would promote gay rights while representing the United States overseas.
He also promised not to bring his partner to Luxembourg.
Hormel must go through the entire nomination process again, including approval at the committee level before a Senate vote.
The leader of one of Texas's most conservative Christian groups criticized national Republican party officials on Thursday for inviting a homosexual congressman to speak at the GOP convention in Philadelphia next week.
A spokesman for Texas Gov.
George Bush, who is expected to win the presidential nomination at the convention, replied that Arizona Rep.
Jim Kolbe's sexual orientation has nothing to do with his scheduled speech on free trade.
Cathie Adams, president of the Eagle Forum of Texas and a member of the national party's platform committee, said the decision to invite Kolbe directly contradicts the ``pro-family'' plank of the GOP platform, which does not uphold the rights of homosexuals.
Adams stopped short of pulling her support from Bush, saying ``I'm not making any threats like that right now''.
But, she said, ``this is a quota.
... This is being done to pander to the homosexual agenda''.
Kolbe is scheduled to address the convention about free trade issues for three minutes on Tuesday night.
According to the Log Cabin Republicans, a gay conservative group, it will be the first time a homosexual man has spoken at the GOP's national convention.
Adams sent an e-mail to about 500 people on Thursday _ delegates and others _ from Philadelphia, where she is meeting with the platform committee in preparation for next week's convention.
``My heart is crying,'' Adams wrote.
``I need your prayers for a response that proclaims God-fearing wisdom.
... ``It's hypocritical to have that plank, then invite an open homosexual to address our convention just because he's homosexual,'' she wrote, referring to the pro-family plank in the GOP platform.
A Kolbe spokeswoman said she had not seen the letter and declined to comment.
A Bush spokesman said the Congressman's sexual orientation ``is not a factor''.
``We're pleased that he'll be talking about the importance of free trade and opening markets to American products and producers,'' said Bush campaign spokesman Scott McClellan.
``Congressman Kolbe is a leader in promoting and encouraging free and fair trade''.
State party leaders agreed, saying Kolbe's sexual orientation is ``a nonissue''.
``I would respectfully disagree'' with Adams' characterization, said Texas state party spokesman Robert Black.
``It appears that Congressman Kolbe has decided that the broad issues that all Republicans agree upon is more important than his homoseuxal rights agenda, and that's why he has decided to speak at the convention''.
Bush was criticized by Christian groups earlier this year after meeting with Log Cabin Republicans and saying he welcomed them in his campaign.
Adams suggested the party invite conservative Alan Keyes, who lost his bid for the nomination early in the primary season, to speak on moral issues ``to save face with all the families across America''.
``The epitome of that ability as an orator on moral and social issues is Alan Keyes,'' she said.
Keyes spokeswoman Connie Hair said his phone lines were down at his home and he could not be reached for comment.
(Visit the Star-Telegram's online services on the World Wide Web: www.star-telegram.com) nn
WASHINGTON _ Texas Gov.
George W.
Bush's first-ever meeting with gay Republicans may bolster his image as a ``compassionate conservative'' but the session this Thursday in Austin, Texas, has irked leaders of a nationwide gay GOP group who weren't invited.
Mindy Tucker, a spokeswoman for the Bush campaign, said Monday the two-term governor looks forward to his invitation-only meeting with 13 gay Republicans, including rank-and-file members of the Log Cabin Republicans, a national organization of gay Republicans.
Among those not invited were leaders of the Log Cabin organization, which endorsed Sen.
John McGain, R-Ariz.
, in the GOP primary.
``All Republicans are important in this election,'' Tucker said.
``We have to unify our party to be successful in November.
Part of unifying is reaching out and being inclusive''.
During his hard-fought presidential primary campaign when he was seeking the support of conservatives, Bush refused to meet with gay Republicans or representatives of the 11,000-member Log Cabin Republicans.
Bush explained at the time that such a meeting ``creates a huge political scene'' and that he ``didn't want to create a ruckus''.
Bush announced plans last week to meet with the GOP gays at the governor's mansion, saying the post-primary season is ``a different time''.
`It's important for me to unify our party.
And I welcome the gay Americans who support me, some of whom are members of the Log Cabin Republican club,'' he added.
Gays and lesbians voters made up about 5 percent of the electorate nationwide in 1996, according to exit polls conducted by Voters News Service during voting that year.
But the gay community tends to support Democrats for federal office more often than Republicans.
For example, in California's March 7 primary _ in which voters could cast popular votes for candidates in either party _ 2 percent of voters in the GOP primary and 11 percent of voters in the Democratic primary told exit poll surveys they were gay.
Tucker said that Bush wants to discuss the ``common goal of ending the Clinton-Gore era'' as well as ``other issues of importance to the governor and the group''.
Tucker added: ``The governor always likes to take the opportunity to talk about why he's running for president''.
Tucker said Bush would discuss education, tax cuts, a defense buildup, and steps to strengthen Social Security and Medicare.
She said she did not know if Bush would discuss proposals for broadening the federal campaign to combat AIDS or steps to tackle the discrimination that ranks as a top priority for many gay and lesbian activists.
GOP presidential nominees and the Log Cabin Republicans have a stormy history.
Republican nominee Bob Dole, a former Senate majority leader from Kansas, rejected a campaign donation from Log Cabin Republicans in 1996 in a bid to cement political support from voters who might be offended.
Bush's meeting has stirred controversy within the gay community.
David Hanson, a leader of Log Cabin Republicans in California from San Juan Capistrano, Calif.
, wrote to Bush last week to complain that the exclusive meeting with gay Republicans in Austin was merely ``an effort to end the media story'' rather than an attempt to ``deal forthrightly'' with the issues that concern gay civil rights activists.
Rich Tafel, executive director of the Log Cabin Republicans, the nationwide organization founded in 1978 that raises about $100,000 every two years to help Republican candidates in federal elections, said he has not been invited to meet with Bush.
Tafel's organization ran $20,000 in radio advertisements before the March 7 Super-Tuesday primaries that offered support for McCain, Bush's rival.
In a 1,800-word memo to members on the organization's website, Tafel said Bush's refusal to meet with the national leadership of the Log Cabin Republicans ``has illuminated many of the flaws in his campaign which may have an impact on our party's chances in November''.
Tafel said that Bush ``demands loyalty'' before considering a meeting.
Tafel adds: ``Bush, far from being a uniter who is compassionate, has actually played upon divisions to win the nomination and now shows little desire to heal them.
A candidate who cannot unite the Republican party won't win this elector''.
Carl Schmid, an alternative GOP delegate to the GOP convention from Washington, D.C., who serves on the board of the Human Rights Campaign, the largest gay rights advocacy organization in the nation, said he was meeting with Bush in an effort to ``improve the understanding of gay people and gay issues within the Republican party''.
Schmid added that Bush was holding the first meeting in history between openly gay Republicans and a presumptive GOP nominee.
``That shows that Gov.
Bush is trying to unite the party and broaden the level of support for his candidacy,'' Schmid said.
Schmid said that he hoped that leaders of the Log Cabin Republicans eventually ``will be invited to such a meeting in the future,'' adding that the first session with the presumptive GOP nominee was being reserved for ``gay Republicans who have worked with the campaign for the past year''.
Among others who have been invited to take part are: _ David Greer, chairman of the Pennsylvania Log Cabin Republicans; _ Rebecca Maestri, a member of the Northern Virginia chapter of Log Cabin Republican Club; _ David Catania, a city council member in Washington, D.C.
_ Plattsburgh, N.Y., Mayor Jim Stewart; _ Former Rep.
Steve Gunderson, R-Wis.
Log Cabin Republicans favor ``full equality'' for gays, including granting the legal protections of marriage to same-sex couples.
Bush has voiced opposition to sanctioning gay marriages.
He has been ambiguous about whether he would appoint openly gay people to posts in federal government.
Tucker said the Bush campaign is aware of Tafel's criticism but added: ``I really won't want to respond to him directly''.
Tucker said the Bush campaign would await the outcome of Thursday's meeting to map its next overtures to gay Republicans and gay Americans for the fall campaign.
&UR; &LR; &QL; (Stewart M.
Powell can be reached at 202-298-6920 or at the e-mail address stewart(at)hearstdc.com)
The New York Times said in an editorial for Thursday, Aug.
12: Gay men and lesbians may be born homosexual, but they aren't born Democrats.
They have often voted that way, however, because the national Republican Party has been so hostile.
Now, in the ebb of the great cultural wars mounted by conservatives for the last two decades, that seems to be changing.
The most prominent Republican candidates for president in the next election, as Katharine Seelye reported Wednesday in The Times, are taking positions that are ``subtly but fundamentally more inviting'' to gay and lesbian voters than at any time before.
Some, boiled down, are not all that subtle.
Texas Gov.
George W.
Bush Jr.
has said he would have no qualms hiring homosexuals.
Elizabeth Dole has declared that she would not turn away money from a gay Republican group, as her husband did in the 1996 campaign.
The plain-spoken Sen.
John McCain said he could envision a gay president someday.
But even the more subtle changes in the candidate field are remarkable.
When asked how he would react if one of his children were homosexual, former Vice President Dan Quayle, the standard-bearer of the religious right, said he would be supportive ``whatever they are''.
The pugnacious Patrick Buchanan, who declared ``a cultural war'' aimed squarely at homosexuals from the podium of the Republican National Convention in 1992, has not made the subject an issue this year.
That represents a sea change.
It was the Republican Party that first turned anti-homosexual attitudes into a political weapon.
It was among Republicans in the Senate in the McCarthy era that the witch hunt for homosexuals in government and the military began.
It was President Dwight Eisenhower who signed the executive order making homosexuality grounds for rejection or dismissal from federal employment, a directive that J.
Edgar Hoover's FBI, local police and local Republicans and Democrats alike turned into a decades-long hunt.
It was the television preachers of the religious right, reacting against the gay rights movement in the 1970s, who began to set the social agenda for the modern Republican Party 20 years ago.
The height of their influence came with Pat Buchanan's and Pat Robertson's speeches at the Republican Convention in 1992, but that spring Bill Clinton reached out to homosexuals in a single appearance at a gay fund-raiser in Hollywood.
No nominee had done that before, and the opposing party views produced a national gay vote for the first time in the 1992 presidential election.
It went Democratic, and in states like Georgia, which Clinton won by only 16,000 votes, it may have been decisive.
Republican oratory has been growing more moderate ever since.
In Congress, where Republicans like Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott of Mississippi, have solid fundamentalist voter bases back home, mean-spirited talk about homosexuals has continued.
But Ralph Reed, president of the Christian Coalition until last year, never made homosexuals a national campaign issue after 1992.
There are still 15 months for this new tolerance to be tested.
But for now it is refreshing to listen to the voice of an important preacher in the Republican Party, Rich Tafel, an ordained American Baptist minister and the head of the national gay Log Cabin Republicans.
For years, he and other gay Republicans have been feeling unwanted.
Now, he says, ``the tone has totally changed''.
That may not be music to the ears of Democrats like Vice President Al Gore, who has spent years being friendly to homosexuals.
But after half a century of jeers and police whistles, it is a hopeful sound indeed.
AUSTIN, Texas _ A West Texas legislator is sponsoring a bill that would ban gays and lesbians from becoming foster parents or adopting children in state custody, prompting a sharp attack from a gay Republican group.
``This bill is offensive, and I think any fair-minded individual will find this bill to be offensive,'' said Steve Labinski, president of Log Cabin Republicans of Texas, which advocates equal treatment of homosexuals in the GOP.
The proposal, filed this week by state Rep.
Warren Chisum, R-Pampa, would direct Child Protective Services not to place children in homes with homosexual parents and defines their sexual practices as ``deviate''.
Private adoptions would not be affected, but thousands of children at risk could be.
Currently the state oversees 17,578 foster children and last year approved 1,548 adoptions.
Labinski called Chisum's proposal ``unrepublican'' and said it hardly echoes the concept of ``compassionate conservatism'' championed by Gov.
George W.
Bush. Chisum, however, maintains that his research shows homosexual parents place children at risk of an unhealthy lifestyle, illegal activity or an unstable home life.
Chisum considers homosexual acts illegal under the state's sodomy law.
``This bill is not about any rights of gays and lesbians to be parents,'' said Chisum, who sponsored an unsuccessful bill in the 1997 legislative session that said Texas would not recognize gay marriages.
``This bill ensures that the state will provide the best possible homes for children who have already been abused and neglected,'' Chisum said.
The issue could erupt into a divisive debate should it hit the floor of the Texas House when the Legislature meets next year.
State Rep.
Glen Maxey, an Austin Democrat and the only openly gay legislator, has said any law or policy that authorized such a ``witch hunt'' would ``create a world of hurt''.
The bill responds to a dispute last year when Dallas CPS caseworker Rebecca Bledsoe was disciplined after abruptly removing an infant from the home of a lesbian foster parent.
Bledsoe said she was told she had failed to show respect for the foster mother.
She filed a lawsuit against the state in September, and the American Civil Liberties Union intervened the following month to argue against Bledsoe.
CPS officials have said Bledsoe wrongfully removed the child, violating agency policy because she did not notify the child's foster mother or the child's attorney first.
``We're looking for a placement that is going to best meet these kids' needs who have been abused or neglected.
We simply do not screen based on sexual preference or sexual orientation,'' said Marla Sheely, spokeswoman for the Texas Department of Protective and Regulatory Services, the umbrella agency for CPS.
Homes are screened to ensure safe environments, whether the parents are ``green, purple, gay, straight, whatever,'' Sheely said.
&QL; XXXX END OF STORY &QL;
AUSTIN, Texas _ Anti-gay rights groups concerned about Gov.
George W.
Bush's recent meeting with gay Republicans now want the probable GOP presidential nominee to meet with them so they can enlighten him about ``the homosexual political agenda''.
``The homosexual agenda is incompatible with family life,'' the groups, including the Southern Baptist Convention, told Bush in a letter saying he should meet with them to ``demonstrate your commitment to the family by...
meeting with those of us who believe that homosexual activism poses a serious threat to our marriage-based culture and to the freedoms of speech, religion and association''.
Bush spokesman Scott McClellan said Bush meets with pro-family leaders ``all the time'' but no decision has been made on whether he would sit down with the groups who sent the letter.
``He agrees with them on the importance of families and the sanctity of marriage,'' McClellan said, adding, ``Governor Bush is running an inclusive campaign and he welcomes the support of all Americans''.
The meeting request comes as Bush steps up his efforts to offer a bipartisan and inclusive image that includes inviting support from gay voters.
After months of declining to meet with leaders of the Log Cabin Republicans, a gay organization, Bush earlier this month huddled privately with 12 gay Republicans hand-picked by his campaign.
Included was former U.S.
Rep. Steve Gunderson of Wisconsin, who said the session meant that ``never again will a major-party candidate be able to run for president without addressing gay and lesbian issues''.
On Thursday, Gunderson criticized the letter from the groups as something less than a request for ``dialogue or honest conversation''.
``There is a desire for a confrontation and an ultimatum,'' he said.
Gunderson said the letter is indicative of how tricky the equation is as Bush tries to put a more tolerant face on their party.
``There is no question that the struggle within the Republican Party is to hold together an increasingly diverse coalition,'' said Gunderson.
``And we all need to help manage it.
I would hope that could be done in ways other than public debates through press releases''.
The 12 groups said they want to tell Bush ``the facts behind the homosexual political agenda that often go unreported''.
``Homosexual activists are trying to use the Republican Party, much like the Democratic Party, as a vehicle to achieve their strategic objective of harnessing government and corporate power to impose acceptance of homosexual behavior,'' the groups told Bush, adding that gay groups ``seek nothing less than the ability to mandate teaching to schoolchildren that homosexuality is normal and healthy''.
``The legal attack on the Boy Scouts is the most visible example of where this agenda will lead if it is not firmly _ and actively _ opposed,'' the groups told Bush.
The U.S.
Supreme Court on Wednesday heard arguments in a case sparked by the Boy Scouts' expulsion of a New Jersey leader who is gay.
Bush's foray into gay issues also comes as some conservative groups are angered over the Vermont Legislature's approval this week of marriage-like ``gay unions,'' and shortly before Sunday's ``Millennium March'' in Washington that is expected to attract 300,000 supporters of gay rights.
Organizers hope the rally will highlight the issue in a presidential election year.
Bush has tried to reach out to gay voters without embracing their positions.
After his meeting with the gay Republicans, Bush said his message to conservatives upset about the session would be, ``I welcome gay Americans into my campaign.
... But I want the conservative Republicans to understand that we judge people based upon their heart and soul, and while we disagree on gay marriage, for example, we agree on a lot of other issues and it's important for people to hear that''.
Bush said he was a ``better person'' for having met with the gay Republicans, and that their life stories were ``very compelling''.
Though he said he welcomed gay voters into his campaign, Bush reiterated his opposition to initiatives of importance to that community, including same-sex marriages, adoptions by gay couples and expanding anti-hate crime laws to treat homosexuals in the same manner as racial and ethnic minorities.
The meeting upset some conservative Republicans, including former presidential contender Gary Bauer who said it ``elevated the gay rights agenda to a level of recognition within the Republican Party that contradicts our long-standing commitment to pro-family values''.
In their letter to Bush, the conservative groups, including the Family Research Council, the American Family Association and Concerned Women for America, indicated that they agree with Bauer.
``You will find that homosexual activists will not be satisfied with the civil rights all Americans enjoy.
They do not want tolerance; that's what they have.
They demand acceptance of their lifestyle and protection for their practices.
This will devastate family life and wholly undermine your plans to restore the morale of our military,'' the groups told Bush.
Contact Herman at kherman(at)statesman.com Story Filed By Cox Newspapers For Use By Clients of the New York Times News Service
WASHINGTON _ Sen &UR;. &LR; Afonse D'Amato met privately Monoday with leaders from several major gay organizations, some of which have been among his sharpest critics, to defend his positions on homosexual issues and to ask for their support in his campaign for re-election.
People who attended the meeting at a private club in midtown Manhattan said by telephone that D'Amato, a Republican who is seeking his fourth term this year, had asked to meet with the groups because he felt that his record on gay rights was deeply misunderstood.
The meeting showed how far D'Amato has come in his willingness to anger the conservatives that represent his political base to win votes from moderate to liberal voters.
The senator will be running on the Conservative Party line in November and is seeking the nomination of the Right to Life Party as well.
``I would think it doesn't help him with individual conservative voters in New York,'' said Michael Long, chairman of the state's Conservative Party.
``But I really don't see conservatives deserting Senator D'Amato''.
Though many of the organizations represented at the meeting are nonprofit groups that do not give political endorsements, several people who attended said they thought that D'Amato was not just seeking support from gay voters, but also trying to burnish his image as a moderate among swing voters, including suburbanites and women.
``In a race where you are going to be attacked as an extremist, it's an inoculating thing to have a good record on gay and lesbian issues,'' said Rich Tafel, executive director of the Log Cabin Republicans, a group representing gay Republicans.
``It's hard to call you a extremist when you are a lead co-sponsor on a nondiscrimination bill for gays and lesbians''.
D'Amato is a co-sponsor of legislation that would prohibit employment discrimination based on sexual preferences.
Several people who attended the meeting said it was frank and open, as many of the advocates pressed D'Amato, whose own record on gay rights is considered relatively strong, to be more forceful in pushing his fellow Republicans to stop blocking such legislation, particularly in Albany.
``It was a good meeting, and it remains to be seen whether it was a good beginning,'' said Richard Burns, executive director of the Lesbian and Gay Community Services Center, a nonprofit agency in Greenwich Village.
``There is a disconnect between Senator D'Amato's positions in Washington and the Republican Party here in New York state,'' he continued.
``The local party has institutionalized homophobia on many fronts, and we look to him as a Republican leader to help shape the future behavior and thinking of the New York State Republican Party''.
D'Amato did not return phone calls for comment on the meeting.
``Senator D'Amato was happy to discuss his strong record on civil rights issues with community leaders today,'' said his spokeswoman, Lisette McSoud Mondello.
At the meeting were about 20 people representing about 10 organizations, including the Human Rights Campaign, a political organization; Empire State Pride Agenda, a lobbying group; the Stonewall Democratic Club, the Gay Men's Health Crisis, a nonprofit organization, and the Hetrick-Martin Institute, an agency serving gay youths.
D'Amato has supported gay rights more in recent years, many advocates say.
In 1993, he spoke on the Senate floor in support of gay men and lesbians in the military.
He has also pushed for federal financing for AIDS services.
And this year, he wrote a sharply worded letter to the Senate majority leader, Trent Lott, R-Miss.
, urging him not to block the Clinton administration's gay nominee for ambassador to Luxembourg, James Hormel.
Many Democrats contend D'Amato's shifting views on gay rights fit a pattern of his taking moderate positions near election time.
But associates of D'Amato's contend his positions have been influenced by his friendship with gay people and his opposition to discrimination in general.
Many groups have complained bitterly that D'Amato, who is widely viewed as the most powerful Republican in New York State, has not done enough to pressure the Republican majority leader of the state senate, Joseph L.
Bruno, to stop blocking a sweeping bill in the senate to guarantee rights for gay people.
Several people who have been critical of D'Amato left the meeting pleased with his receptiveness, but still skeptical about his willingness to be their advocate.
``I do think he heard our request,'' said Matt Foreman, executive director of Empire State Pride Agenda.
``But politics really is about results, and not promises.''
WASHINGTON _ Despite high-profile shootings at schools around the country in the past year, such violence has remained steady since 1992 and the world inside the classroom remains a relatively safe place, a report being released Wednesday concludes.
The Justice Policy Institute (JPI), a liberal criminal justice think tank with offices in Washington and San Francisco, said a media-driven public fear about school violence is ``overblown''.
The institute's report charged that policymakers in Washington and in state legislatures have overreacted to a crisis that does not exist and are engaged in a ``tragic misdirection of attention and resources''.
JPI's Jason Ziedenberg, co-author of the study, said, ``Juvenile violence is a real problem in society, but if you really want to track it down, you're looking wrong place.
School is about as safe a place as you can put your kids''.
There were 40 shooting deaths in schools in the 1997-1998 school year, the report said.
A year earlier there were 25.
But In the 1992-1993 school year, 55 shooting deaths occurred.
In 1993-1994 there were 51, followed by 20 in 1994-1995 and 35 in 1995-1996.
Although the number of school deaths jumped 60 percent last year over the year before, Zeidenberg called the increase ``statistically insignificant'' because of the numbers in 1992-1993 and 1993-1994.
The report relied on data from the U.S.
Education Department, the Justice Department, the FBI, nongovernment groups that track school violence and newspaper clippings.
It defined deadly school violence as killings of adults as well as children on school property.
For instance, it counted the May 1998 shooting of a speech diagnostician by her jealous boyfriend at Stranahan High School in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
Concern over school violence reached its apogee in March when two boys, aged 13 and 11, opened fire on a crowd of children and teachers in Jonesboro, Ark.
Four students and one teacher died in the hail of bullets.
Similar incidents during the 1997-1998 school year occurred in Pearl, Miss.
West Paducah, Ky.
Edinboro, Pa.
and Springfield, Ore.
Many news outlets referred to each shooting as ``an all-too-familiar story'' or ``another in a recent trend,'' the JPI report said.
Members of Congress and other officials ``reacted abruptly to what they perceived to be a huge swing in public opinion,'' the report continued, adding: ``A moral panic swept the country''.
President Clinton has endorsed pending legislation to increase the number of police officers available to deal with juvenile crime.
Gov. James Gilmore of Virginia, a Republican, suggested reducing the number of nighttime scholastic sporting events and after-school programs as a way of lowering the chance of violence.
Local school administrators also reacted.
Two elementary school students in Tyrone, Ga.
, were temporarily suspended for pinpointing those they wanted to do away with, a list that included Barney the purple dinosaur and the British singing group, Spice Girls.
The report called all these reactions ``overblown''.
It said that ``everyday gun violence'' against children is a far more pressing concern.
More than 3,000 children a year die from gunfire, said the report, quoting figures from the U.S.
National Center for Health Statistics.
Children are killed in gun accidents at 23 times the rate they are killed in schools, the report said.
The relatively flat trend-line noted in the report appeared to be in line with data from other sources.
The FBI, for instance, reported there were 25 homicides committed by juveniles under 13 in 1965 and 16 in 1996.
In a two-year study between 1992 and 1994, the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention found that students had less than a one in a million chance of dying violently in school.
By contrast, the Justice Department's Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Program in 1997 calculated that overall, for every million juveniles, 38 were murdered that year.
That's 40 times the rate for deaths in schools, the JPI report said.
The institute's study encouraged continuation of after-school programs as a way of ``productively occupying'' children.
It also recommended gun restrictions, including the ``one-gun-a-month'' laws that limit the quantities of guns an individual can purchase.
Kent Scheidegger, legal director of the conservative Criminal Justice Legal Foundation in Sacramento, Calif.
, said the flat school violence trendline noted in the report ``doesn't mean a whole lot''.
Although down overall in recent years, crime and violence in and out of school remains significantly higher than it was 40 years ago, he said.
LOS ANGELES --Forget security guards and metal detectors, students and faculty at St.
Genevieve High School in the Panorama City community of Los Angeles' San Fernando Valley started the school year figuring out how to get along with each other better.
Juniors and seniors put away their textbooks to paint welcome signs, write greeting letters for freshmen and learn friendship songs _ all building up to a surprise for ninth-graders who start school Thursday.
``This is our version of security,'' said Dan Horn, the school's new principal.
``I never understood the obsession with metal detectors.
You should be teaching educators and kids how to deal with rage''.
It's all part of Horn's dramatic departure from the national preoccupation with metal detectors, surveillance cameras, identification tags and armed guards aimed at preventing bloodshed at schools.
``You might keep guns out with metal detectors, but you won't keep the rage out,'' Horn said Tuesday.
The two Columbine High School students who attacked their Littleton, Colo.
, classmates left notes that detailed their feelings of alienation.
At St.
Genevieve, the goal is to make the school experience inclusive for all students by ``fortifying their hearts'' and creating a campus that values every student, Horn said.
For the first time in years, deeply rooted morale problems seem to have disappeared, students said.
``No one is throwing random insults anymore.
We should have started this way back,'' said 16-year-old Myrel Catbagan.
``On the first day, I thought it would be another boring, stupid day.
But now I really feel like this is my school''.
The juniors and seniors broke into small groups and talked about how to deal with problems that can grow into rage and how to treat every student with dignity and respect.
``We talked about how society creates criminals out of men and boys because we are taught not to express our feelings,'' said 16-year-old junior Muriel Tovar.
``We're learning how to express those feelings and listen to other people who need to talk''.
Some new St.
Genevieve teachers at first were skeptical.
``I didn't think the kids would be receptive to opening up and talking about feelings,'' said world religions teacher Peter Sabado.
``But I'm very surprised with the unity and character building that's going on''.
Sabado has always believed that extra security and metal detectors were just a Band-Aid that does nothing to prevent youth violence.
``Students have issues they need to talk about, and they need to know they can talk to teachers and other students and feel accepted,'' Sabado said.
Joanne Altamira, 16, spent most of Tuesday morning painting greeting posters for the freshman class, with great anticipation of a better school year.
``We don't want anything like Columbine to happen here,'' she said.
``I've got a really good feeling about this school this year.
I feel accepted and wanted.
I hope we leave a mark that stays forever''.
This year's atmosphere is vastly different.
Students described a years-long atmosphere of strict discipline and an administration that didn't seem to respect students, on top of the lure of the gang and drug culture typical of any urban neighborhood.
Javier Cisneros said in his freshman year he ``hung out with the wrong crowd,'' and met some of his classmates by insulting them.
``But then I changed because I saw I could have so many more friends if I treated them right, and I found myself opening up,'' Cisneros said.
``But after I changed, the old principal and some of the teachers kept treating me like a bad kid.
No one noticed that I changed''.
Cisneros credits Horn with re-creating a positive atmosphere and making students feel important, accepted and respected _ all this in the first week of school.
``I feel like that stereotype of me is gone and that I'm accepted,'' Cisneros said.
``It feels good''.
Cisneros is the poster child for what Horn is trying to accomplish.
``With having these focus groups and being positive, we are setting a new foundation built on character,'' Horn said.
``When you put character and issues of human spirit first, the grades, accomplishments, morale and everything else follow''.
Elsewhere on campus, students and faculty members joined to build their school anew.
They helped janitors clean closets and throw away years of debris.
Horn, who believes in the therapeutic effects of animals on humans, brings his dog, Blue, to school with him every day.
``He was a stray I found at my last school, and I found the kids loved it when he ran around campus,'' Horn said.
``He's been a hit here so far''.
But the rebirth of the campus community is what stands out the most.
``Instead of threatening us not to be violent or bad, the teachers are trusting us with everything...
and they keep trusting us,'' said 16-year-old Monica Monterroza.
``It really makes us want to be better and do better''.
And when the freshmen arrive Thursday, there will be no hazing, ignoring or insults.
Only greetings with open arms.
``We want all of the students to feel the same way we do.
We want to really welcome the freshmen,'' said 16-year-old Jellyn Dungo.
``Everything is fresh this year _ new coaches, teachers, principals _ I never thought there could be such a dramatic change here''.
X X X
INGLEWOOD, Calif.
(AP) --A high school is scrapping celebrations of Black History Month and Cinco de Mayo, worried that the ethnic celebrations will spark ethnic violence.
Inglewood High School, 10 miles south of downtown Los Angeles, has been the site of tensions between black and Hispanic students.
The campus was forced to close for a day last May after a riot broke out and dozens of police were called in.
A task force found that the fight in May began, in part, because Hispanic students who comprise about half the school population felt slighted.
They were angry that a month was set aside to honor black history but only a day to celebrate Cinco de Mayo.
Instead of celebrating Black History Month and Cinco de Mayo, Principal Lowell Winston has told teachers to follow a ``multicultural education approach'' throughout the school year.
``Let's talk about all cultures and contributions all the time,'' Winston said.
``This school has had racial problems that are unique...
the old ways didn't work''.
February is marked by many schools around the country as Black History Month.
May 5 is a national holiday in Mexico commemorating an 1862 battle in which Mexico defeated French occupation troops southeast of Mexico City .
MCKEE, Ky.
(AP) --Students returning to classes at Jackson County High School hardly paid attention to the new small plaques mounted in their classrooms.
Maybe the new dress code was on their minds.
But officials in this eastern Kentucky school district hope that by posting the Ten Commandments in each classroom, they can prevent violence and other problems that have plagued schools nationwide.
The county school board and superintendent allowed the plaques as part of ``an effort to start having good morals in school...
because of all the violent issues that have been showing up,'' said Betty Bond, principal of the high school.
The plaques went up Wednesday.
Schools around the country have considered using the Ten Commandments as a symbol of morality amid headline-grabbing violence involving students over the past year.
In the 1960s, the U.S.
Supreme Court ruled that organized prayer and Bible readings were not permitted in public schools; in 1980, it decided posting the Ten Commandments violated the Constitution's ban of government-established religion.
But in June, the U.S.
House passed a measure allowing the Ten Commandments to be posted in schools and other government buildings.
The bill now goes to the Senate.
Timothy Crawford, Jackson County's school district attorney, said he is concerned about lawsuits, but believes the plaques in the district's five schools are allowed by law because they were paid for and posted by local volunteers and not sponsored by the district.
``I do not believe posting the Ten Commandments is imposing anyone's religious views because the kids are not tested on that, the kids are not required to look at it, and the kids are not required to read it, and they're not held accountable for that knowledge,'' Crawford said.
Tonya Adams, principal of Union Chapel Elementary School in Russell County, which has had the Ten Commandments posted for years, said she's never received any complaints about it.
``People in our community would probably be upset if they were taken away,'' Adams said.
In Adams County, Ohio, a group of ministers paid to place Ten Commandments tablets outside four high schools to counter ``moral decline''.
Jeff Vessels, executive director of the American Civil Liberties Union of Kentucky, said the ACLU considers the move unconstitutional, but would not act unless there is a complaint.
``The ACLU is certainly very concerned about school violence, but saying posting the Ten Commandments solves it is incredibly simplistic,'' he said.
Brad Hughes, spokesman for the Kentucky School Boards Association, said the organization tells districts to follow the Supreme Court ruling and not allow the Ten Commandments to be posted.
He said a lawsuit could cost a district up to hundreds of thousands of dollars.
There was virtually no opposition from the community about the plaques, and students returning to the high school said little about them.
``We have a new dress code this year, and I suspect in the children's mind that's much more of a trauma than the Ten Commandments being placed up because this is a very traditional community and really church-oriented,'' Bond said .
CONYERS, Ga.
_ Exactly one month after the fatal shootings in Littleton, Colo.
, a suicidal high school student, angry over breaking up with his girlfriend, turned his anger on the world Thursday, shooting six of his classmates and emotionally scarring countless others.
No one was killed at Heritage High School in Rockdale County, a middle-class community about 25 miles east of Atlanta.
Five victims suffered minor injuries, and a 15-year-old, Stephanie Laster, underwent surgery after a bullet struck her in the buttocks and entered her intestines.
According to witnesses, the 15-year-old unleashed a barrage of bullets into a crowd of students waiting for school to start.
Known to talk big about his guns, friends said, the boy started shooting at about 8 a.m. into a crowd of about 300 students in the lobby near the cafeteria.
Authorities say he was looking to shoot the boy who had stolen his girl, though that person was not in sight.
The troubled youth surrendered in tears minutes after firing.
By the end of the day, he was charged with aggravated assault.
As the rapid-fire shots ruptured the morning calm, panicked students dropped to the floor, leapt behind tables, or ran out the doors.
``It was a pop, pop, pop, pop, pop,'' sophomore Kylie Forrester said, describing the gunshots that chased the students outside.
``The whole school, everybody, was just roaring out of the school,'' said Amy Ladd, 16.
Even in the cautious wake of Columbine, some signs of trouble were seen and apparently ignored at Heritage.
The day before the shootings, classmate Nathaniel Deeter heard the distraught youth speaking of his failed romance, saying he wanted to take his own life.
A week ago he spoke of bringing a gun to school.
``I told him it was stupid,'' said Deeter, who didn't think enough of the threat to tell school administrators.
Lately the troubled boy's grades and his relationship with his parents were suffering, and he had told several fellow students he carried a handgun.
Police say he rode on the school bus with the.22-caliber rifle stuffed in a book bag.
He had sawed off much of the wooden stock to make it fit.
Rockdale District Attorney Richard Read said one charge of aggravated assault was filed in Juvenile Court against the suspect.
He said he expected that multiple aggravated assault charges, possibly as many as 30, will be brought in Juvenile Court.
And he said he will move to transfer the charges to Superior Court, possibly next week, where the 15-year-old could be charged as an adult.
Outside the school, breathless students hugged one another for comfort.
A half dozen linked hands in a circle and bowed their heads in prayer.
Some at first thought the firecracker-like clamor was a prank, coming on the last day of senior class, when yearbooks and prom pictures were to be handed out.
The day before, 2,000 crickets were released in the hallways.
Deeter recalled chatting with his classmate 10 minutes before he started shooting.
``I heard you had broken up with your girlfriend,'' Deeter had said.
``Yeah, I'm real mad about it,'' came the reply.
The boy looked distant and removed as he spoke of the failed relationship, a romance of two years that had ended this week, Deeter said.
``He looked like he was thinking about something else,'' said Deeter, who moved away.
A few moments later came the gunfire.
``He shot the kid next to me in the foot,'' Deeter said of the boy, who was wearing jeans and a baggy, blue pullover.
He seemed to be firing quickly and randomly.
Deeter said he screamed at him: ``What are you doing''?!
``When he was shooting, it was as though he was looking right through people,'' Jason Cheek and Brian Barnhardt were shot in the buttocks.
Ryan Rosa, a junior, was shot in the right ankle.
Cania Collins was shot in the knee.
Drake Hoy thought the first shot was a firecracker.
The second sounded real enough, and the third shot sliced into his left foot.
``I started to run, but it started hurting pretty bad,'' said Hoy, 18.
``I took off my boot and blood was everywhere''.
Teachers and parents got him and the other injured students to the front lawn, from where they were rushed to the hospital.
When he finished shooting, the former Boy Scout, described by students as quietly rebellious, dropped his rifle and backed his way outside.
He pulled out a handgun and put it in his mouth.
Over the next 10 minutes, a few teachers repeatedly asked him to put down the gun and step away from it.
The youth didn't say a word, as if in a daze, and kept the gun in his mouth.
Then a teacher walked up to him and said, ``Let me have the gun''.
According to senior Joe Watts, who watched from a window, the teen handed the revolver to the teacher.
``(Assistant Principal Cecil) Brinkley put his arm around him,'' Watts said.
``The guy started crying and saying, 'Oh my God, I'm so scared'''.
That the shooting happened in suburban Atlanta, in a school known for parental involvement and good academics, has heightened fear in many parents, students and teachers.
``Schools are no longer immune to guns, drugs and violence,'' said Pam Riley, executive director of the Center for the Prevention of School Violence in North Carolina.
``But I don't think that all schools should panic and close.
Then the terrorism will win out.
What we need to do is provide ways for kids to do the right thing''.
The shooting shattered what should have been a gorgeous last day of school for Heritage seniors.
Some had thought of taking the day off.
It was a sun-drenched morning filled with the promise of summer.
Graduation awaits next Friday.
Several students said they had finally shaken off the anxiety that followed the killing of 15 people at Columbine High School in Colorado, a school similar in many ways to Heritage.
Both schools serve predominantly white, suburban, middle-class neighborhoods.
Heritage High School was named one of the top 10 schools in the metro Atlanta area by U.S.
News and World Report.
About 80 percent of Heritage graduates go on to college.
The school has video surveillance cameras in the hallways and an armed sheriff's deputy on duty.
After the carnage at Columbine, Heritage was among many metro Atlanta school who felt the reverberations.
Letters were sent out to parents assuring them the school was safe.
But, like many schools, Heritage has endured bomb threats in recent weeks.
Though school will be closed at least today, many students said they would be frightened to enter those doors again.
``I kind of thought it could happen here.
It could happen anywhere,'' said Shayna McClelland.
``I don't feel safe here anymore''.
``No, I'm not'' going back to Heritage, said Julie Kull.
``I'm home-schooling or something.
I'm not going back there''.
She added, ``I just want to know why''.
With television crews broadcasting the frightened faces of Heritage students, a collective angst swept through many schools and homes.
Principals across metro Atlanta scrambled to figure out what to do next and how to prevent a similar occurrence.
Some parents, already in a heightened state of concern since Columbine, suggested simply canceling the rest of the school year, bringing down the curtain on a year brimming with fear.
Others called for metal detectors and more police in the schools, outcries that have been echoed for weeks following Columbine and the spate of bomb threats.
School safety has been catapulted to the top of the social agenda.
After Thursday's shootings, Cobb County school officials are considering asking for additional police support in the schools.
Security was doubled at McCleskey Middle School in Cobb, with a sheriff's deputy joining the campus officer.
At Cobb's Walton High, side entrances to the school were sealed off and visitors were not allowed on campus Thursday morning.
Charles Warr, principal at Sandy Creek High School in north Fayette County, plans to address the student body today.
He said he will urge students to help keep the school safe by breaking their code of silence.
``I'm going to tell them there's a difference between childish tattling and passing on critical information that someone is considering something serious such as suicide or murder,'' Warr said.
For now, the horror and fear and desire to stop such incidents has brought people together.
That process began right at the time of the shootings, as students such as Greg Bluemling assisted a girl who had been shot.
He and other students helped her into a room, where they applied pressure to stop the bleeding.
A teacher came in with a first aid kit and they used gauze to stanch the bleeding.
Thursday evening, people gathered to pray at the Church in the Now's youth ministry, where they prayed for the students and the community.
``I am definitely seeing the glass half full, and I'm so relieved we are not planning a funeral,'' said Bishop Jim Earl Swilley.
Gov. Roy Barnes planned to meet today with the families of students injured in the shooting.
``It's frustrating not to have an easy solution,'' Barnes said.
``I want to give the people a solution, but this will take more than just me.
This is not the time to have a knee-jerk reaction, but to ponder the long-term solutions that will work''.
Thursday's crime claimed more than just six victims.
``It was real heartbreaking, it really was _ even for the ones who didn't know who got shot,'' said Amber Barnhart, standing outside Rockdale Hospital on Thursday afternoon.
Her brother Brian was among the wounded.
Some people say they've had more of these threats and problems than they can take.
``It's springtime, when there are pranks and high spirits anyway, and unfortunately we have this horrible tragedy at Columbine hanging over us.
And we have students who are perhaps unstable themselves,'' said Tim Callahan, spokesman for the Professional Association of Georgia Educators.
``This school year cannot end soon enough,'' he added.
Story Filed By Cox Newspapers For Use By Clients of the New York Times News Service
MELROSE, Mass.
_ Unless local school parent councils vote otherwise, every public school student in the state next year could be wearing clothes to school most wouldn't be caught dead in once they get home.
Dressed in a calf-length red velveteen coat over a black Amityville T-shirt, calf-high boots and with a casket-shaped purse slung over her shoulder, Melrose High school senior Erica Muxie was horrified at the thought of uniformity being imposed upon her.
``It's a public school, you should be able to express yourself,'' said the spiked-collar sporting Muxie, who plans to study forensic science in college.
But Governor Paul Cellucci _ and dozens of school officials and politicians across the country _ argue the opposite: if too much attention is spent on looking sharp in school, learning suffers.
Cellucci proposed legislation Thursday that would require all schools to have uniforms unless their local parent councils opted out.
This would effectively force each school to at least debate the uniform issue.
That debate has already been resolved in New York, where the city's 550,000 elementary school students will be required to wear uniforms this fall, following a school uniform revival that began in Long Beach, Calif.
in 1994.
About 10 states have some type of school uniform regulation, in addition to scores of individual cities.
In Massachusetts, several cities, including Lawrence and Springfield, have uniform policies, although they vary greatly.
Lawrence and Springfield require students to wear them, while Boston allows its schools to choose.
``With our proposal, Massachusetts will join a nationwide trend that has seen parents, teachers, principals and school committees work together to promote an atmosphere of safety and seriousness in their classrooms by regulating what students wear to school each day,'' Cellucci said.
The school uniform issue is far from new in Massachusetts, but still ignites enormous passion, no matter what the age of a student, teacher or parent.
It was an issue in the 1993 mayoral race in Boston, and in the 1996 presidential campaign.
In 1997, Gov.
William Weld filed legislation allowing schools to require uniforms if they chose, but it died.
The parent councils Cellucci mentioned also include school principals, teachers, and, in some cases, community leaders and students.
Since Lawrence began requiring in 1994 that students wear navy blue pants or skirt and white shirt every day, ``I've seen immense changes,'' said Denise McCarthy, principal of the Wetherbee Saunders Elementary School.
``The children felt better about themselves.
It gave them a sense of belonging to both the school district and the school''.
Some parents say the uniform both prevents violence over clothes, and sets a tone of the classroom as a serious place for learning.
``Kids fight over clothes, they steal clothes,'' said Carl Askins a Jamaica Plain parent of two children in Boston public schools, who sits on the city's Parent Council.
He said he would want more information before deciding on a mandatory policy, but that the cost of being fashionable in public schools is an undue burden on many parents.
Kids, while largely negative on uniform policies, do admit they can work.
Dressed in a crisp white shirt and tie at the East Boston Edwards School, where Cellucci made his announcement, Chris Hunt, 13, said ``everyone hates'' his school's uniform of khaki or blue khaki pants and white or navy blue sweatshirt.
But now, Hunt said, ``you can't judge other kids by their clothes''.
Melrose High senior Muxie on the other hand said that if forced to wear a uniform, ``I wouldn't feel like myself anymore.
So I would be less inclined to try to do well in school''.
Before the 1960s, uniforms in public schools were commonplace, then largely abandoned in that free-spirited decade.
It was as school violence and classroom disruptions increased across the country in the '80s and early 1990s that uniforms caught on again.
After Long Beach instituted its policy, it reported a reduction in school crime and an increase in attendance.
Chicago school officials attribute a drop in gang violence to school uniform policies in many of their schools.
What courts may still have to decide in Massachusetts is whether schools have the right to make uniforms mandatory.
In Lawrence and Boston, if parents protest the uniforms, their children can usually wear what they want.
``If it is voluntary it is fine.
When it becomes mandatory, it becomes more problematic,'' said John Roberts, executive director of the ACLU of Massachusetts.
He said buying uniforms might provide a financial hardship for parents and the argument that uniforms can save parents' money isn't true.
``They just go home and get out of them and put something else on,'' Roberts said.
&QL; Globe correspondent Hilary Sargent contributed to this report.)
*Associated Press Write PORT HURON, Mich.
(AP) --City schools closed last week after the arrest of four students who allegedly planned a massacre similar to Colorado's Columbine High School slayings will reopen Monday.
Police will be posted inside Holland Woods Middle School.
A bomb was found near the school campus Thursday after school officials and parents gathered to discuss the alleged plot by the four students at the school.
Police have said the bomb is unrelated to the alleged plot.
All of the district's 21 schools were closed Friday, then searched over the weekend and found to be safe, superintendent Bill Kimball said Sunday.
Security will also be tightened district-wide on Monday, and teachers will discuss school safety with students.
``We're taking every measure possible to be sure our kids are safe,'' Kimball said.
Some parents were uncomfortable with the decision to reopen the schools in this city about 60 miles northeast of Detroit.
``I think that they should just end the school year and have that extra three weeks to figure out what they're going to do to safeguard our kids for next year,'' said Heidy Martindale, the mother of a 12-year-old girl at Holland Woods.
She said parents were told at a meeting Thursday night that Holland Woods was safe.
Within hours, a custodian found the bomb.
Whitney Fontenot, 12, a sixth grader at Holland Woods, cried when she heard that school would be reopened.
``I feel uncomfortable going to that school,'' Whitney said.
Four Holland Woods students ages 12 to 14 remain jailed after being charged on Thursday with conspiracy to commit murder at the 560-student school.
The two 14-year-olds, Justin Schnepp and Jedaiah Zinzo, have been charged as adults and are being held on $100,000 bond each.
The younger students are to appear Tuesday in St.
Clair County Juvenile Court.
All were arrested last week after a 14-year-old girl told police she overheard some of them talking about an elaborate school killing spree.
The girl told police the boys said their plan was to go on a shooting spree in a gym assembly and detonate a bomb afterward, acts aimed at killing the school's ``preps,'' the popular clique of students.
Again Sunday, police and school district officials declined to comment on evidence in the case.
Officials have said the teens planned to top the death toll of the April 20 massacre at Columbine High School in Littleton, Colo.
, where teenage gunmen Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold killed 13 before committing suicide.
HOUSTON _ To prevent school violence, suburban and rural school districts should consider some measures used by their urban counterparts, experts and educators say.
None of the school shootings since 1997 have happened in urban schools.
Experts say that's probably because they stress such prevention measures as metal detectors, increased security, school uniforms, parental involvement, alternative schools and conflict-resolution programs.
``In the case of suburban school districts, they haven't had to think about this,'' said Joanne McDaniel, research director for the Center for the Prevention of School Violence in Raleigh, N.C.
And it doesn't help, she said, when school districts that haven't had to deal with serious violence ignore the multifaceted problems that lead to incidents such as the murders of 15 students Tuesday attack in Littleton, Col.
Many schools aren't taking day-to-day security measures, such as requiring students to wear school uniforms.
``More than 70 percent of our schools require uniforms, which make it hard to hide a weapon and prevent the wearing of gang-related clothing,'' said Terry Abbott, Houston Independent School District spokesman.
Whether real or perceived, violence in the nation's schools has been an issue of concern, research and debate for more than two decades.
When school shootings such as the ones that occurred in Colorado, Mississippi, Kentucky, Arkansas and Oregon happen, some districts look, listen and search for ways not to become the next Littleton.
In the Fort Bend Independent School District southwest of Houston, administrators such as Mary Ann Simpson, the associate superintendent for community relations, are watching the TV coverage from Colorado.
``Short of turning our schools into prisons, there is no 100 percent guarantee that you can eliminate this kind of thing,'' she said.
``But you can certainly look for ways to strengthen and improve what you have in place...
and listen to our kids, talk to our kids, especially those that seem isolated''.
Fort Bend doesn't have metal detectors in its schools but does have district police officers at middle and high school campuses, video surveillance cameras in some schools and a student crime-stopper number to report incidents to administrators.
Tonya Aultman-Bettridge, a researcher with the Center for the Study and Prevention of Violence in Boulder, Colo.
, isn't sure the school shootings in Littleton could have been prevented with better or more security measures.
She believes school climate is more of a deterrent than metal detectors.
``I don't think installing metal detectors and having armed police officers roaming the halls is the solution,'' she said.
``We concentrate a lot on teaching kids math and science, and we don't integrate things like violence prevention into the curriculum''.
She suggested that districts foster an environment where violent behavior is unacceptable; teach students social skills such as anger management and empathy; and create a crisis plan and build partnerships between schools, law enforcement, social services, parents and the community.
``Schools don't exist by themselves,'' Aultman-Bettridge said.
McDaniel noted that the majority of the nation's schools continue to be safe places free of violent incidents.
``We are still talking small numbers,'' she said.
``But we are talking serious rage, and we need to get to know our young people so that when they are feeling rage we can act to help, not just react''.
XXXXXXX END OF STORY
ATLANTA _ At rural schoolhouses and sprawling urban campuses across the country, millions of students returning to class in the next few weeks will encounter a steely array of new security measures.
In many schools, lockers are being removed, cameras are being installed as hallway monitors, and students will have to swipe a computerized ID card just to get in the door.
Even as new statistics show that school violence is actually on the decline, the lurid images from armed assaults by students this year have prompted most school districts to take some kind of forceful action to instill a sense of greater security.
That inclination can only be strengthened by the shooting at a Jewish community center in Los Angeles on Tuesday.
Many districts are forging close new relationships with local police departments, and carefully regulating who can be on school grounds.
In dozens of locales as disparate as Pittsburgh and Palm Beach County, Fla.
, SWAT teams have spent the summer learning the layouts of high schools and conducting drills involving mock hostage-taking.
And in towns as small as Allen, Texas, many students returning to school will find metal detectors and armed security guards at the door, while others will have to trade their battered canvas backpacks for see-through bags designed to make it harder to conceal a weapon.
Some districts, by contrast, have rejected the idea of detection systems, finding them an affront to educational openness, and are concentrating instead on a drumbeat of programs to make students feel more responsible for their school's safety and less reluctant to report violations.
The new policies vary widely, but virtually all are a direct reaction to the shootings this spring at high schools in Littleton, Colo.
, and here in Georgia, in the Atlanta suburb of Conyers.
Many administrators who say they have never received a threat of bombing or gunfire have nonetheless felt obliged to reassure parents and students that steps have been taken to reduce the chances that their school is the next to be encircled by news helicopters.
``Everyone feels the need to do something, even though no one agrees on what that should be,'' said Joe Schneider, deputy executive director of the American Association of School Administrators, which represents superintendents.
``You can't just tell parents that you're doing more of the same''.
There are indications, however, that security measures and counseling programs gradually undertaken before the shootings this spring have proved increasingly effective.
In a report issued this week, the U.S.
Department of Education, having compiled statistics from each of the states, found that gun-related expulsions in the last school year dropped by nearly a third from the previous year.
Another study, issued last week by researchers at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, determined that violence committed by teen-agers had declined during the 1990s, along with the number of weapons carried to school.
But administrators know that such studies are of little comfort to parents who have learned that violence can erupt anywhere, at any moment.
Indeed, taken as a whole the new policies seem intended as much to instill peace of mind as to actually keep a student from opening fire on his school, prevention of which many officials say is probably impossible in any case.
A doorway metal detector, for example, can do little to forestall a blaze of gunfire in the schoolyard.
``It's not that districts are taking these steps solely to reassure people, but there's often as much reassurance built into them as actual effectiveness,'' said Dennis Lewis, director of school public safety in Springfield, Mo.
, and vice president of the National Association of School Safety and Law Enforcement Officers.
``Parents will call up and ask if a school has metal detectors.
All of us know that no metal detector is going to stop someone who wants to shoot in a school.
But a parent wants to hear that they're there''.
Many districts conducted highly publicized drills over the summer in which police SWAT teams entered schools to put down mock shootings.
Last month in Palm Beach County, Fla.
, for example, drama students with fake wounds pretended to be casualties as officers stormed a school and ``arrested'' police academy recruits who were pretending to take hostages and plant bombs, all under the gaze of television cameras.
A similar drill at a Pittsburgh high school on Wednesday, complete with helicopters and ersatz pipe bombs, was so realistic that some summer students believed that police were responding to an actual attack.
The exercises provided useful training to police in the unfamiliar territory of a school building, while also sending a message of control to parents and teachers.
Schneider, of the superintendents' group, said the shaping of a new relationship with the local police department was probably the most common step adopted by the nation's school districts.
After it became known that the Littleton Police Department had been unfamiliar with the layout of Columbine High School, where 12 students and a teacher were killed by two young gunmen on April 20, many districts began distributing floor plans and computerized blueprints of their schools to their police departments, which in turn began touring the schools over the summer.
The most aggressive districts are erecting virtual walls around their schools, as if trying to keep the outside world at bay.
In Allen, Texas, a suburb of Dallas that cut back its class schedule last spring after a series of bomb threats, officials are spending $1 million to bring in metal detectors, surveillance cameras and a new security force, and are requiring students to wear identification badges.
In Deltona, Fla.
, near Orlando, lockers have been removed and book bags banned; students will get a duplicate set of books to keep at home.
Many schools are installing caller ID on their telephones so they can trace bomb threats.
nn In Owensboro, Ky.
, all but the front doors of public schools have been permanently locked, and visitors and latecomers must be buzzed in with a new security system that alerts the office whenever anyone approaches the door.
Video cameras are being installed on school buses in Clayton County, Ga.
, southeast of Atlanta.
Columbine High School itself will install emergency alarms throughout the building, and will be employing dogs to search for weapons and explosives.
Proponents of such measures consider them effective deterrents, a tangible reflection of a school's insistence on safety.
John Coleman, director of safety and security for the public schools of Kansas City, Mo.
, said his district had not had a single shooting or knifing since it installed metal detectors in middle and high schools seven years ago.
Similar results are reported in Dallas.
But support for the fortress approach to security is hardly universal.
Methods of security tend to vary as broadly as parenting techniques, reflecting a lack of consensus on the best ways to reduce violence.
Most of the districts in the Los Angeles-Orange County area, for example, have chosen not to spend money on new electronic security systems or guards, relying instead on the random checks with hand-held metal detectors that they have used for several years.
Dan Isaacs, assistant superintendent of the Los Angeles Unified School District, said the city's schools were far too large to check every student entering the building without cutting into class time.
But as a result of the Columbine shooting, he said, the district will be putting up thousands of signs around its 670 schools that read: ``Making threats is no joke.
All threats will be taken seriously and will subject anyone making them to any and all applicable criminal and civil penalties, as well as school discipline, including expulsion''.
Many administrators believe that increased physical security is futile and counterproductive, noting that Columbine High had security guards and that Heritage High, the school in Conyers where a 15-year-old gunman wounded six other students on May 20, had surveillance cameras.
Instead, these administrators have begun conducting intensive seminars to train students and teachers to recognize and defuse threats before they lead to violence.
``We don't want to create an image of a police state, and we don't want dogs sniffing around,'' said Dr.
Francis Connor, superintendent of the Dighton-Rehoboth regional schools, a small district in southeastern Massachusetts.
``By addressing the physical changes, you are only dealing with the symptom of the problem''.
Walled-in students, Connor said, tend to begin feeling isolated and outside the mainstream.
Connor's district has prepared a guide to alert teachers to the symptoms of students prone to violence.
And many districts will hold meetings with all students to impress on them a new seriousness about security, and encourage them to report even jocular-sounding threats made by other students.
(Several students at Heritage High School have said they knew that the teen-age gunman there had talked of emulating the youths who opened fire at Columbine High a month earlier).
``Almost every time a kid brings a weapon to school, he winds up showing it to someone else,'' said Jim Kelly, the chief of the school police in Palm Beach, where a pipe bomb was discovered at a senior prom in May.
``We're trying to help the kids understand that if they see that, they're doing their friend a favor by reporting it, maybe saving them from some prison time.
We've got anonymous hot lines set up, and we want them to feel like they're a part of what we're doing''.
In Shrewsbury, a suburb of Worcester, Mass.
, school officials are working with architects to design a new high school, scheduled to open in three years, which will have fewer entrances than the current building and a community liaison office where students and members of the staff can meet with counselors and police officers to talk about school security issues.
The new building will not, however, be equipped with any metal detectors.
Daniel Gutekanst, the principal of Shrewsbury High School, said anyone could evade a metal detector, but not necessarily a system of adults and students working together to spot threats.
``It sounds a little corny,'' he said, ``but the issue is not getting metal detectors, it's making sure you have mental detectors.''
At graduation Friday night (May 21) at Hobbton High School in rural North Carolina, Principal Stewart Hobbs will wear a bulletproof vest.
He will be guarded by a sheriff's deputy, and an expert marksman will be posted on the water tower that overlooks the football field where the seniors will receive their diplomas.
Everyone at the ceremony will have to pass through a metal detector, and the crowd will be peppered with plainclothes officers on the lookout for a potential killer.
``I doubt anything will happen, but right now, the way things are, you just can't take any chances,'' Hobbs said in an interview Thursday.
Hobbs's precautions _ taken in response to a death threat telephoned to the local sheriff's department on Monday _ seem a fitting punctuation mark to a school year that can't end soon enough for students, teachers, administrators and parents.
In the month since the massacre at Columbine High School in Littleton, Colo.
, a sense of foreboding has enveloped schools across the country.
There are nagging fears and whispered worries that the angry kid, or the outcast kid, or the quiet kid, or the heartbroken kid, or the kid no one would ever expect, might suddenly erupt in violence.
Just such an event happened Thursday in Conyers, Ga.
, 25 miles east of Atlanta, where a 15-year-old sophomore who reportedly had recently broken up with his girlfriend shot six fellow students then surrendered his gun and cried.
None of the injuries appeared life-threatening.
Coming on the one-month anniversary of the Columbine High School shootings that ended 15 lives, the incident reinforced the growing _ some would say exaggerated _ perception that schools must now be considered danger zones.
Before Thursday's shootings, those fears had been fueled primarily by a rash of bomb threats that emptied schools and attracted widespread media attention, which by some accounts created a cycle of even more copycat threats.
Before Columbine _ where the two killers came armed with more than 50 explosives _ school bomb threats were usually ignored by the media in the belief that publicizing such events only encourages more.
There is no way to tell whether such threats have increased since the April 20 massacre, or whether the public is simply learning how frequently they occur.
But authorities on school violence said Thursday that the perception of greater risk seems to reflect a troubling reality.
``One of the things we're all wrestling with is the question of where did all these crazies come from at one time?
There's a feeling among some people that they were always out there, and were just waiting for a psychological release like Columbine so they could carry out their plans,'' said Peter Blauvelt, president of the National Alliance for Safe Schools in College Park, Md.
``Schools are going to need to spend this summer trying to develop strategies to take a hard look at their populations, because they clearly need additional help,'' Blauvelt added.
In one case, authorities say, they have no doubt the Colorado shootings unleashed a murderous plan.
The incident involved four boys arrested last week in Port Huron, Mich.
, for allegedly plotting to kill dozens of their schoolmates.
Afterward, a prosecutor said the investigation showed the youths' goal was ``to kill more people than in Columbine''.
At a court hearing, the local school board president, David Devendorf, pleaded for two of the suspects, both 13, to be kept in custody.
``You can't believe the fear out there,'' he said.
The reverberations from Columbine also have been felt in Allen, Texas, where school administrators in the Dallas suburb went so far as to cancel the last two weeks of classes after a dozen bomb threats in a single week.
Criticized by some parents for capitulating to terror, school officials rescinded the closure and decided to hold some classes.
Still, some parents were steaming.
``They got overly alarmed and sent a message to kids that they couldn't control what happens in school,'' said Al Burke, whose twin daughters Jackie and Jessica are seniors at Allen High School.
``Sometimes, the overreaction can do as much damage as the threat itself,'' said Burke, who runs a sports ticket agency.
``I don't think we should be sending our kids to school in the morning and telling them to watch out for the bomb that might get dropped on their heads''.
No part of the country has remained untouched.
In Lake County, Fla.
, the school board said a dog trained to sniff out guns and bombs would roam school hallways next year.
A bomb threat in Phoenix kept 1,700 students home on a test day; a student who allegedly bragged about the feat was suspended.
Maryland schools were paralyzed by a rumor that May 10 would be a day of violence.
And in the nation's capital, all but one of the city's 17 high schools were evacuated on April 26 because of a bomb threat.
Massachusetts schools also have been beset by numerous bomb and massacre threats.
In Cohasset, for instance, someone scrawled ``May 6 you will die'' on a boys' bathroom wall; nothing happened, but a quarter of the middle and high school students stayed home that day.
Boston schools responded by establishing an anonymous tip line for students to report fears of impending violence.
Several authorities on school violence said aggressive responses by school officials should be expected and even encouraged in the wake of Columbine.
They said the Colorado killings ratcheted up fears because of the amount of firepower and planning that went into the attack.
``With Littleton, with the mass destruction involved and the knowledge that such materials are available to students, the stakes were raised,'' said June Arnette, associate director of the National School Safety Center in Westlake Village, Calif.
``We had felt like schools in the suburbs were insulated, and the message now is that it can and does happen where we least expect it,'' she added.
Despite the fears, authorities hasten to note that schools are extremely safe.
Historically, fewer than 1 percent of homicides involving school-age children have occurred in or around schools, according to the Centers for Disease Control.
Since 1992, the annual death toll from school shootings has ranged from 20 to 55, according to the National School Safety Center, including suicides.
There have been 24 school shooting deaths so far this year, including the 15 in Columbine.
Joanne McDaniel, research director at the Center for the Prevention of School Violence in Raleigh, N.C., said the overall knowledge that schools are safe might have led to a sense of complacency before Columbine, despite past school shootings.
``We've become good at identifying warning signs, but I think in some cases we're still too slow to respond.
That's a sign of complacency,'' she said.
However, McDaniel added, the response to Columbine makes it unlikely schools will take danger signals lightly anytime soon.
Patty Yoxall, spokeswoman for the National PTA, said her organization intends to use that attention to focus resources and energy on the problem before the 1999-2000 school year.
``We're hoping to keep this issue at the forefront of concern for all of American society.
Until we are really willing to address the problems of school violence as a society, we're not going to be able to effect lasting change,'' Yoxall said.
As for Hobbs, the North Carolina principal targetted by an anonymous death threat, he said the precautions he takes will not end when the last diploma is handed out.
A new policy at his school calls for all doors to be locked except for the main entrance; all bathrooms have been closed off except for one; more lights have been installed outside the school; and a wooded area behind the school is being cleared, to prevent potential attacks from being lauched from the dense cover.
``I feel like every day I walk into this school I put my life on the line, and sometimes I sit there and wonder why I do that,'' Hobbs said.
``But it's the good days and it's these kids who come back down the road and thank you, and that's when you know why you keep doing it''.
As he spoke, a group of about 20 high-spirited seniors crowded around him, begging for extra tickets to the graduation.
WASHINGTON (AP) --Like many other schools preparing for this week's anniversary of the Columbine High School shootings, Rich East High School in Park Forest, Ill.
, will have extra police officers on hand.
But Cmdr.
Patrick Fitzgerald, a city police officer who coordinates school safety, said he's heard more from reporters writing about Thursday's anniversary than from parents and students who fear it may precipitate copycat violence.
''Things have been very quiet out here,'' he said.
''When we take attendance on Thursday, we'll find out''.
On April 20, 1999, two students at Columbine High in Littleton, Colo.
, fatally shot 12 students and a teacher before killing themselves.
This year, education officials nationwide are taking steps to prevent their schools from suffering the same fate.
They've suspended students caught making threats, hired more officers and volunteers for the day, canceled classes or major school events and held meetings with parents and community members.
''The date has them worried about a lot of copycats or kids who may try to send a very, very strong message,'' said Curt Lavarello, executive director of the National Association of School Resource Officers, a group of K-12 school officers that has nearly doubled to 5,500 members in the last year.
''Let's face it, it's been absolutely clear in the tragedies we see on school campuses that these incidents can occur at any time, at any school''.
On Thursday, Colorado Gov.
Bill Owens will lead thousands in a moment of silence at 11:21 a.m., the time the attack began.
But the school itself is on alert, with 24-hour police patrols and special badges for anyone wanting to get in.
''Schools are under pressure to be prepared,'' said June Arnett, associate director of the Westlake, Calif.-based National School Safety Center.
The safety center, which advises school security officers, says its statistics show that youngsters are 99 times more likely to be shot and killed on the street or at home than in school.
And this school year's 11 homicides and suicides --even with the Feb.
29 shooting of Michigan first-grader by a classmate --is well below last year's tally of 26.
But multiple-victim shootings --such as Littleton, Jonesboro, Ark.
, and Springfield, Ore.
--have nonetheless left schools recently guarding against or preparing for a major school-wide crisis.
For example: --our Anchorage, Alaska, students were suspended Friday after allegedly threatening to use guns and bombs at Wendler Middle School.
--n Rush City, Minn.
, high school officials suspended four students Thursday after saying the teen-agers threatened to take over their school and shoot it up on the Columbine anniversary.
--n Jay, Okla.
, where threats of gun violence prompted parents to pull their children out of classes Friday, police are expected to return to school halls this week, which also marks the fifth anniversary of the Oklahoma City bombing.
But some officials fear they may be overreacting to perceived threats.
The year since the shooting has left schools open to critics who contend they prefer SWAT teams to mental health counselors.
Nearly two dozen schools have tested Mosaic-2000, an FBI computer profiling program that rates potentially violent students on a scale of 1 to 10.
And hundreds of officers trained at R.U.
Ready High, a school-shooting simulation at the Blackwater Training Center in Moyock, N.C.
These preparations are just as important as fire drills in keeping children out of harm's way, said Kenneth S.
Trump, owner of National School Safety and Security Services, a Cleveland-based school security consulting firm.
''You need some basic security measures in schools,'' he said.
''Why should we apologize for that''? ----- On the Net: National School Safety Center: http://www.nssc1.org/ National School Safety and Security Services: http://www.schoolsecurity.org/ National Association of School Resource Officers: http://www.nasro.org
JONESBORO, Ark.
(AP) --A year after two heavily armed boys pulled a fire alarm and shot students filing out of Westside Middle School, killing four girls and a teacher, the superintendent talks about keeping a ``cloak of safety'' around his 75-acre campus.
Shrubs are cut back and a wooden fence now sets off the campus.
A uniformed officer teaches Arkansas criminal law and acts as student confidante.
School counselors are on duty every day.
The district is functioning normally, says Superintendent Dick Young, though it doesn't use alarms for fire drills anymore.
He won't allow visitors in the hallways, saying children may be reminded what happened March 24, 1998.
``We're in that gulf between wanting to remember and wanting to forget,'' Young says.
Students Natalie Brooks, Paige Ann Herring, Stephanie Johnson and Britthney Varner and teacher Shannon Wright were cut down in the brief outburst of gunfire.
A memorial garden is being built at the spot where they fell.
The shootings in Jonesboro and at schools in Pearl, Miss.
West Paducah, Ky.
Edinboro, Pa.
Fayetteville, Tenn.
Springfield, Ore.
and Richmond, Va.
, alarmed the nation last year.
President Clinton called the outbreak ``a terrible tragedy'' and noted ``the awful specter of students being killed by other young people at schools''.
Ronald Stephens of the California-based National School Safety Center told a House subcommittee after the Jonesboro shootings: ``It should not require an act of courage for parents to send their children to school''.
On Wednesday, the first anniversary of the Jonesboro shootings, Rep.
Carolyn McCarthy, D-N.Y.
, plans to introduce for a second time the Children's Gun Violence Prevention Act.
The legislation never came to a vote last year.
McCarthy says the bill would help prosecute people who sell guns to children, require gun owners to keep guns away from children and finance violence awareness programs in schools.
In the Senate, Richard Durbin, D-Ill.
, and John Chafee, R-R.I.
, will make another run at the Child Access Prevention bill.
The bill holds adults liable when children use improperly stored firearms to kill or injure others.
Stephens says some 20 states have laws calling for school safety plans and many have set up hot lines for anonymous tips on disturbing behavior by students, tightened access to campuses and improved screening for school visitors.
``In my view, the schools are safer than they were a year ago because we've had a heightened need to be vigilant,'' he says.
Suzann Wilson, who lost her 11-year-old daughter, Britthney, knows of the changes at Westside but says more should be done to make students feel safe.
Class sizes should be smaller, students should be taught how to deal with their anger and schools should have more counselors.
Wilson says her 14-year-old daughter, Brandi, is still afraid to go to school.
And for Wilson's part, ``there's not a day goes by that I don't think that she's going back to where her sister got killed,'' she says.
In Mississippi, where Pearl High School student Luke Woodham was convicted of killing two classmates and wounding seven others after first killing his mother Oct.
1, 1997, the Legislature passed a law broadening the death penalty to include killings on school campuses.
In Kentucky, student Michael Carneal received a life sentence after pleading guilty but mentally ill in the shooting deaths of three students at Heath High School near Paducah on Dec.
1, 1997.
McCracken County School District, home to Heath High, now posts armed security guards, requires student identification tags and searches for weapons in its schools.
In Lexington, Ashland and other places, anonymous tip lines were set up to report guns or drugs brought to schools.
In Virginia, where 14-year-old Quinshawn Booker wounded a teacher and a 74-year-old school volunteer last June 15, Gov.
Jim Gilmore has released $1.5 million to put some 45 additional police officers in schools.
Richmond schools ordered teachers to step up hallway patrols, and some school districts installed surveillance cameras.
Booker pleaded guilty to five counts and was required to complete a program at a school for troubled youths, then be on probation until age 21.
Wilson has forcefully lobbied the Arkansas Legislature to hold gun owners liable if they leave unlocked guns where children can get them.
She also wants to prohibit juveniles from owning guns after their release from detention centers.
A heated exchange with gun advocates on the state Capitol steps Feb.
1 brought Wilson to tears.
But the confrontation did not diminish her resolve.
``It keeps me directed,'' Wilson says.
``It's something to focus on.
If I didn't have this, then I would have to stop and think about what I lost''.
While Arkansas legislators debated her proposals and other measures, Andrew Golden, 12, and Mitchell Johnson, 14, remained in custody at a juvenile prison 20 minutes away.
The boys, 11 and 13 at the time of the shootings, were found delinquent in the five killings and the wounding of 10 others.
They are due to be released at age 18.
``We really have not had any major problems with either boy.
They have not been difficult juveniles for us,'' says Joe Quinn, spokesman for the Human Services Department, which oversees juvenile corrections.
Jonesboro is marking the sad anniversary with two gatherings at 12:40 p.m., the time of the shootings--one at the school, the second at the courthouse.
Wilson says Brandi will sing at the courthouse, and afterward the family will visit the cemetery where Britthney is buried.
CONYERS, Ga.
(AP) --Jim Borland came home from a business trip last month to find his 18-year-old son, Graham, gripped by news of carnage at a high school in Littleton, Colo.
``You know, this could happen in our school system,'' the teen-ager recalls warning his dad.
``We need to take more precautions''.
Jim Borland agreed.
As a school board member for Rockdale County, he was in a good position to respond.
Safety measures already were in place, and administrators quickly reinforced them.
But that couldn't stop a 15-year-old from opening fire Thursday, wounding six students and adding Heritage High School to the list of campus bloodbaths that have shocked and frustrated the nation.
The shooting in Rockdale County, a semirural setting of 68,000 mostly white, comfortable and churchgoing inhabitants, 25 miles east of Atlanta, suggests that even an elaborate safety system may not be enough.
Under measures adopted a few years ago, Rockdale schools already employed armed police during school hours, according to schools spokeswoman Susan Paul Smith.
Video cameras already watched kids on school buses and in the schools.
Trained dogs periodically came to sniff for drugs.
Earlier this year, when Thomas Solomon Jr.
, the youth now charged in the shooting, reportedly brought a gun to school, the allegations were followed up and recorded, though they could never be substantiated, authorities said.
After two teen-agers at Columbine High killed a teacher, 12 students and themselves, security measures in Rockdale, where Conyers is the county seat, were reviewed.
Teachers got a list of steps to take, like keeping rooms secure in an emergency, and taking the attendance roll.
Superintendent Don Peccia sent parents a letter promising investigations and a police response to any ``rumors, threats or allegations''.
``Strict disciplinary consequences will be assigned to any student and to anyone else exhibiting such behavior,'' Peccia wrote.
Children were encouraged to help.
``The kids were told, `Anything that doesn't seem right, speak up,''' said Mary Kommeth, an English teacher at Salem, one of three Rockdale high schools.
Graham Borland, the school board member's son, said that one schoolmate who had often boasted about ``blowing up graduation'' was followed constantly by staff members, and never allowed to be alone.
Borland's father, a leasing company executive, heads a committee to review safety in the school district, which serves more than 13,000 children including preschoolers.
The panel includes about 35 parents, business people, members of law enforcement, and even an FBI agent.
The bloodshed at Heritage High School could have been worse.
The shooter used a rifle that was missing its stock and shot from the hip, said Rockdale County Sheriff Jeff Wigington.
That may explain why the gun was aimed downward, lessening the carnage.
``We also used the word 'blessed' many times,'' Borland said after a school board meeting Thursday, the day of the shooting.
``I think we were very thankful to God.
I think he was looking out for us''.
Among parents gathering for the meeting, which had been scheduled before the shooting took place, there was a hint of resignation.
``I don't think that you could prevent it 100 percent,'' said Paul Lee, a Conyers father of two teen-agers.
``They have terrorists all over the world.
In the Capitol, that guy broke in and killed two guards,'' he said, referring to last July's killings in Washington.
``It could happen anywhere''.
Borland and others say they had striven until now to strike a balance between adequate security and not turning the schools into fortresses.
Now school officials are talking about mandating clear book bags, or no bookbags, a dress code, even metal detectors --ideas that until now had been soundly rejected.
Borland's group will be reviewing the schools' inch-thick crisis management book.
One situation the book doesn't deal with, Borland said, is what to do when a student has a gun.
That could change too.
DECATUR, Ga.
_ If you walk into the middle of Shamrock Middle School wearing a blindfold, then take it off to study the signs on the corridor walls, you might think you're in the heart of scholastic darkness.
The signs warn students to stay in line _ or else.
They spell out rules: ``Three bullying threats: expulsion''.
They warn against distributing drugs: ``Violators will be imprisoned''.
They list the ``parole proof crimes: murder, rape, aggravated sodomy,'' for 12- through 14-year-old students to ponder on their way to class.
How many of their parents thought they'd see the words ``rape'' and ``sodomy'' on middle school walls?
Shamrock is not a seedy, dangerous school _ far from it.
If you turn from the signs to walk through the orderly classrooms, filled with neatly dressed students, or stroll around the surrounding Decatur neighborhood of pleasant ranch houses, the signs seem even more striking.
They are one glaring part of the fight to prevent heinous school crimes like last spring's Columbine massacre in Littleton, Colo.
Just last week, a 12-year-old pulled a loaded.380 handgun on another student in the crowded cafeteria of a Fulton County middle school.
Many schools have resorted to scare signs or metal detectors or surveillance cameras.
``This is the way it is today,'' Shamrock Principal Tom Davis says with regret, by way of explaining the scare-'em-straight signs on his walls.
``It's nothing like when I was a kid in school''.
Yet these measures, while easy to understand and media-genic, may not offer the only _ or the best _ hope at preventing violence at school.
Shamrock and other schools, in addition to employing the ``hardware approach,'' also have launched a new strategy to make schools both safer and happier in the long run: what might be called the human approach.
This tack relies on less visible, but perhaps more effective measures, such as developing mentor programs, broadening anti-bullying policies, bolstering the ranks of school psychologists and giving ``resource officers'' _ school police _ the interpersonal skills of guidance counselors.
``We can't search every knapsack in every car, wondering if there might be a shooting in the parking lot before school,'' says Bill Modzelski of the Safe and Drug-Free Schools Program of the U.S.
Department of Education.
``So we have to depend on prevention _ getting to the roots of the problem.
And that means awareness of the kids' family structure, drug and alcohol problems, making sure someone takes responsibility to know if a child is happy or sad.
Schools are so big now, kids pass through and nobody knows they're there''.
HUMAN VS.
HARDWARE Metal detectors are uncommon in metro Atlanta, but they are credited with sharply reducing violence in New York City.
Warning signs and surveillance cameras are widely used locally, and while they may well be helping to limit violence, they also add an oppressive air to schools.
Some students resent that cameras ``make everyone feel like a suspect,'' in the words of an Illinois high school girl who sent an e-mail to a chat room on school violence.
And the camera will never be invented that can peer into a young person's mind.
Witness the shooting at suburban Atlanta's Bear Creek Middle School, in 1994.
On camera, security officers actually saw one boy ambush another, wounding him in the knee, but it happened so fast there was nothing that could be done to prevent it.
The locked-down mentality has even reached elementary schools.
Dr. Stephen Pastan, 43, of Atlanta was taking his children to his old private grade school in suburban Washington when a guard stopped him at the door, issued him I.D. tags and tried to make him accept an adult escort to tour the school.
``It was like visiting IBM _ I was put off,'' Pastan says.
``Maybe I'm naive about the real dangers but I worry about our children growing up without knowing what it is to feel free''.
In the chatroom run by the Raleigh-based Center for the Prevention of School Violence (www.ncsu.edu/cpsv/), Chris Bresky, senior class president of Clackamas (Ore).
High School, addressed the desire for a more human approach.
``Metal detectors, cameras and K-9 task forces will not scare violence away from the students, it will only scare the students; if the violence is in the students it will get inside the schools,'' Bresky writes.
``The key is to connect with students, raise awareness through speakers, plays, candlelight vigils that there is violence out there and it can happen in their school''.
AN UNDERSTANDING EAR Programs that stress the human approach are in effect to some degree throughout the metro Atlanta area.
But it's DeKalb County _ which began a forceful anti-bullying policy in 1997, two years before it became state law _ that's building a national reputation for innovation.
The system's multifaceted security efforts were mentioned in Time magazine in the coverage of the Columbine tragedy, and are due to be spotlighted in a documentary on the A&AMP;E channel in March.
Although the wall signs at Shamrock, a DeKalb County school, helped curtail a bullying problem a few years ago, Garry McGiboney, director of student relations for DeKalb schools, says it's the less obvious, more subtle, human programs that will make the schools happier and safer in the long haul.
Russel Parris agrees.
The Shamrock student's grades _ and attitude _ have improved since he's received weekly mentoring visits at school from Fred Reese, an employee of a nearby BellSouth office.
``When I need to get something off my chest, my mentor's there,'' says the 13-year-old, one of the 10 percent of Shamrock's 1,057 students who are mentored.
``He tells me, `Don't get mad, don't hit him, even if he was messing with you first'.
It's good advice''.
Jennifer Haygood, 13, adds: ``I can talk from the heart to my mentor, and I don't come in all mad-crazy wanting to blow up the school''.
She smiles as she says this.
She just means normal modern frustration.
Principal Davis feels that mentoring helps students vent anxieties that might otherwise explode.
``That's one of the underlying reasons we have a safe school,'' he says.
DEKALB'S INNOVATIONS You could see the human approach at work at DeKalb's Soapstone Center for the Arts the other day.
A group of students age 9 to 18 was creating their own anger-management play to tour DeKalb schools.
Just when the actors were about to erupt into staged fights, they stopped short _ took a deep breath, slipped on dark glasses and repeated the play's clever, cautionary tag line, ``Get in the cool zone''!
DeKalb schools have broadened the definition of bullying to include not just physical intimidation but ``any kind of harassment that isolates a child,'' says DeKalb schools spokesman Spencer Ragsdale.
``Teachers are trained to look not only for the obvious victims of bullying, but to reach out to the kid who isn't picked for teams, who eats lunch alone.
That's where the pain starts''.
Policies on bullying are posted on the county's Web page (www.dekalb.k12 under ``What's New'') along with findings from a Norwegian study on bullying that was discovered on the Web.
DeKalb's school district also has been the most aggressive locally in enforcing the new state anti-bullying law, expelling at least 12 students since August and sending them for a semester or two to alternative schools where the student-teacher ratio is lower, and the number of psychology-based courses, such as decision-making and anger management, is higher.
``Kids have access to so much violent entertainment, spend so much time in a world where conflicts are resolved with a gun,'' says Kevin Dwyer of the National Association of School Psychologists.
``That's why adolescent bullying, which has always been with us, escalates so much more dangerously now than it did in 1960 or even 1980''.
A CRUCIAL GAME OF HOOPS The human approach to preventing violence is not limited to DeKalb.
Across the nation, school cops are making more effort to connect, to understand students' feelings, says Curt Lavarello, head of the police officers' Florida-based national association.
Sean Burke, resource officer at Lawrence (Mass).
High School _ where a girl recently slashed another girl's face with a knife _ tells of joining in on an after-school basketball game and getting to know a boy who was almost frighteningly silent and intense.
After months of gentle encouragement the boy revealed his secret: He took off his shirt to display a back full of ugly welts.
There was more.
The father who whipped him also had sexually abused him.
Burke, his voice cracking with emotion, says, ``There's tremendous pressure in these kids today.
You need to help them get it out''.
Connecting with students who hurt and healing them is more likely to occur when psychologists are a visible force in the schools, says Dwyer.
Dwyer, author of a widely respected study on the warning signs for school violence, says that when there is a ratio of at least one psychologist per thousand students _ as there are in only six, mostly northeastern states _ the reductions in violence are considerable.
The high ratio of psychologists and their active involvement in the curriculum of Tampa schools, under the banner Project Achieve, was credited for reducing violent incidents in those schools by 80 percent.
Georgia ranks in the middle of the states, with about one psychologist per 2,000 students.
It's the victims of bullies _ not the bullies themselves _ who are most likely to commit the high-profile acts of school violence, DeKalb's McGiboney has found.
``The common thread in these incidents is that the child feels isolated or ostracized,'' he says.
``That feeling may begin at home.
A 13-year-old kid left in his room with a ton of entertainment equipment, or dropped at the mall to hang out all afternoon _ that's not independence.
That's isolation.
Parents need to talk to their kids and offer support before that anger grows''.
Indeed, reaching parents _ persuading them that bullying isn't a necessary rite of passage to toughen a kid's hide _ is almost as big a challenge as reaching students, McGiboney says.
When addressing parents' groups, he begins by asking how many were bullied as youngsters, and almost everyone's hand goes up.
``Then I ask, `How many still think about that bullying today'? and nearly every hand stays up,'' McGiboney says.
``I think that makes my point''.
Story Filed By Cox Newspapers For Use By Clients of the New York Times News Service
WASHINGTON (AP) --Could it happen here?
That was a question many principals and superintendents asked last year after a spate of school shootings across the country.
So they increased security, bought metal detectors and surveillance cameras, created profiles of potentially violent students.
But as another school shooting tragedy unfolded in Littleton, Colo.
, on Tuesday, officials questioned whether any school could protect against such deadly events.
``That's one of the great mysteries --how do you identify a student who is going to act out''? said Barbara Wheeler, school board member in Downers Grove, Ill.
, and former president of the National School Boards Association.
Some schools, adopting an attitude that it's better to be safe than sorry, have responded to the slightest sign of troubled students: --A high school student in Starkville, Miss.
, was arrested in February and faces criminal charges for having a gun on school property.
--An eighth-grader in Clarion County, Pa.
, who had a gun and repeated a threat to kill teachers was arrested at Union High School after a fellow student told his mother of threats.
--A ninth-grade girl in Fairfax County, Va.
, was suspended when she wrote a note to a fellow student expressing anger about her teacher giving her a D, and the teacher took it as a physical threat.
William Modzeleski, the Education Department's safe schools chief, said schools have used federal and state money to identify and treat students who need mental health services.
Schools have also gotten more federal money in the past few years.
Six months ago President Clinton held a White House conference on school violence with about 800 educators and law-enforcement officials.
But Tuesday night, he acknowledged the nation had made little progress in solving the violence problem.
``You know there are a lot of kids out there who...
who build up these grievances in their own mind and who are not being reached,'' Clinton said.
``And it's not just Littleton''.
When the federal Safe and Drug Free Schools program --now funded at $600 million a year -- began five years ago, it focused on student drug abuse.
But in recent years, the focus has shifted to school security.
Federal officials still say schools are safe.
In 1996, theft accounted for 62 percent of crimes against students at school.
``There is the perception that schools are terribly crime-ridden.
The perception is unfounded,'' Modzeleski said.
As the 1997-98 year showed, violence can even erupt at schools that seem safe to teachers and parents.
In March of last year, two boys in Jonesboro, Ark.
, opened fire on a crowd of students at their middle school, killing four classmates and a teacher.
Students also were accused of fatal shootings in Springfield, Ore.
, West Paducah, Ky.
, and Pearl, Miss.
Earlier this week, a high school sophomore in Notus, Idaho, was accused of firing a shotgun in a school hallway.
No one was hurt.
Most school districts haven't faced legal action for not preventing crimes, but they have been held liable for violating students' rights when imposing penalties.
Yet schools have not backed off developing policies because of the threat of lawsuits, Modzeleski said.
They have been working with attorneys to develop fair policies.
It's not clear what policies were followed at Columbine High School in the middle-class suburb of Littleton, where gunmen --believed to be fellow students -- opened fire Tuesday.
Deborah Fallon, a spokeswoman for the Colorado Education Association, said the state's 176 districts set their own policies .
NEW YORK _ The shootings at Columbine High School in Littleton, Colo.
, have led school officials in the New York City metropolitan area to reassess security and in some cases to make changes to minimize threats.
At one extreme is West Hartford, Conn.
, where administrators devised what they termed a ``lockdown'' drill in which students and teachers, practicing in case there should be a shooting, lock all doors and stay put until they are told that the police have arrived.
But a more common reaction is that of New York City, where the Police Department obtained blueprints of the 1,100 schools and asked precinct commanders to work with principals and superintendents on how to handle such an emergency.
Either way, the potential for violence at schools has weighed heavily on many administrators and has generated forums for public discussion in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, which have been spared school shootings but not the heightened alarm.
There were bomb threats in New York area schools after the April 20 shootings at Columbine High School, but no serious incidents were reported.
Shootings at New York City schools are rare; there has not been a fatal one since February 1992, when two teenagers involved in a feud over a gold bracelet were shot dead in the hallway of Thomas Jefferson High School in Brooklyn just moments before Mayor David Dinkins was to arrive for a speech, said Karen Crowe, a spokeswoman for the board.
That shooting led to the widespread use of metal detectors, now installed at 70 city schools.
Reacting to Columbine, New York state officials are requiring districts to report major violent acts _ bomb threats, explosions, shootings _ to the state Department of Education within 48 hours of the incident.
The regulation is designed to better track violence and help raise awareness among school officials and the communities they serve to the potential for violence, said Christopher Carpenter, a spokesman for the department.
He said school officials who failed to comply could face disciplinary action by the state, which licenses principals and superintendents.
In the meantime, a task force headed by Lt.
Gov. Mary Donahue has held public hearings across the state _ the final one was on Wednesday _ to prepare a report for Gov.
George Pataki on improving school safety.
Likewise, New Jersey state officials convened public forums to gather information toward a similar goal, and local districts in Connecticut must report to Gov.
John Rowland by September on how they have improved security.
Some people who work in schools are taking no chances.
A conference on Monday sponsored by the Connecticut Association of Schools and Connecticut Center for School Change at Quinnipiac College in Hamden included agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation instructing teachers on how to be good hostages.
It drew 225 people, the association's largest audience in four years.
SEATTLE _ The sheer magnitude of the slaughter at Littleton's Columbine High School has put Puget Sound-area schools on high alert and prompted sober reviews of school security, including a special meeting this week between Seattle police and school officials.
Local school districts are also reassessing whether lockdown drills _ which are not required by law _ should become mandatory, and are offering training to anxious teachers and principals who feel ill-prepared to respond to armed intruders.
``I hadn't dreamt it could be this horrific,'' said Brian Benzel, chief operations officer of the 48,600-student Seattle School District, referring to the Columbine killings in Littleton, Colo.
``It's just chilling...
It seems like we're going to have to expand our thinking about how to be prepared''.
Benzel and other district officials are meeting this week with Seattle police to review emergency strategies and discuss whether more could be done to prevent an attack like that carried out by the two heavily armed Columbine seniors, Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold.
``It seemed very appropriate that we review procedures and protocol given what happened,'' Benzel said.
``We've had a pretty good relationship with SPD but we want to look at what could be improved''.
Harris and Klebold took the lives of 12 students and one teacher and injured 20 others on April 20 before turning their weapons on themselves.
Seattle police officers serve as school resource officers, visiting regularly and getting to know students and school buildings, said Larry Ferrar, the district's security director.
Police SWAT teams have also drilled at Seattle schools, Ferrar said.
In the aftermath of the worst school slayings in U.S. history, local secondary schools have beefed up security measures, from cracking down on even the mildest threat to launching random weapons sweeps of students with hand-held metal detectors.
At Seattle's Ballard High School, principal Chuck Chinn followed the advice of district security officials and recently stepped up locker checks and random sweeps of students with hand-held metal detectors, a procedure that had only occasionally been used before the Colorado killings.
``It puts the students on notice,'' Chinn said.
``There were virtually no complaints because the kids understood''.
But the 1,120-student Ballard High School, like many schools, has never done a lockdown drill, and Chinn said he is reviewing whether that is now necessary.
When the violence erupted at Columbine, many local districts had already begun revising their emergency manuals to include the threat of armed attacks because of the string of school shootings over the past two years.
Now districts are moving up timetables for training school staff, said Pegi McEvoy, the Seattle district's safety coordinator.
She's been inundated with requests for security training from worried teachers.``We are in a state of hyper-vigilance,'' McEvoy said.
``Just because you have a plan doesn't mean you know what's in it''.
Teachers want basic information, from how to get a lock installed on a classroom door to advice for shielding students from armed intruders, she said.
``Telling students to `drop and cover' can be the wrong thing to do,'' McEvoy said.
``You then become a sitting duck and they can just come up and shoot you.
We saw that in Littleton''.
Instead, running for safety or trying to get out a window could be a better strategy, she said.
A teacher might need to pull the shades on a window to block an intruder's view, or barricade a door.
Some security officials say that lawmakers should make lockdown drills mandatory so that schools are better prepared to protect children.
``There clearly is an issue here that the Legislature should visit about making lockdowns a requirement,'' said Michael Sweeney, security director for the 21,300-student Federal Way School district in Washington state.
``It would overcome the inconsistencies with which schools practice lockdown drills''.
A lockdown is used when a principal determines that there is an external threat to students and staff, from a violent incident near a school to an armed intruder within the building.
Every school has a predetermined signal _ such as a specific number of bells or buzzers _ that alerts staff about a lockdown, and the PA system is also used to give additional information.
During a lockdown, students are held in their classrooms and all doors are locked until further instructions are provided about when and how to clear the building.
In the 25,000-student Kent School District in Kent, Wash.
, security staff are compiling computerized blueprints and aerial photos of each of the 38 schools, said Jim Shimensky, King County Sheriff's liaison deputy and Kent security director.
The Kent SWAT team has also trained in schools after hours.
``It's like an insurance policy,'' Shimensky said.
``If something should happen, they will know the layout and be ready''.
The Kent district has also increased the money it spends training security officers, including requiring them to attend a two-week academy annually, and has boosted salaries to ensure top-quality staff, Shimensky said.
But Shimensky believes that a crucial key to preventing school violence is encouraging students to report threats and weapons to school staff, police and on anonymous tip lines.
``The kids know what is going on before the adults do,'' Shimensky said.
``That's how we've found most of the major weapons in recent years''.
The idea of installing permanent metal detectors at school entrances won little support from school officials, who say it would not only be costly and a logistical nightmare but would be ineffective because determined students would find a way to smuggle in weapons.
``We're running a school district not a prison system,'' said Ferrar, Seattle's security director.
``Where do we draw the line?
I just don't see a simple solution.''
GOLDEN, Colo.
(AP) --The school board that governs Columbine High School has adopted 27 security measures, including panic alarms in main offices and mandatory identification badges for high school students and staff.
The only recommendation by the Jefferson County school district's Safety Task Force that was rejected, because of cost, was the addition of a second non-uniformed campus supervisor at each of the 16 high schools.
Most of the high schools and the district's 18 middle schools now have a uniformed school resource officer who is a police officer or sheriff's deputy.
All will have one under the new plan.
Columbine students will return to their school on Aug.
16 for the first time since the April 20 massacre.
Columbine seniors Eric Harris, 18, and Dylan Klebold, 17, armed with guns and pipe bombs, killed 12 students and a teacher, wounded 23 others and then took their own lives.
Other measures adopted Monday include: requiring visitors to get a school pass, the continued use of search dogs and the installation of a hot line and tip box to report incidents that might lead to violence.
Some task force members asked whether the measures would have stopped the shooting rampage had they been in place.
``We found all of our recommendations can create some kind of safety in the schools.
I think some of these recommendations could have prevented what happened,'' said task force member and Columbine student Sergie Gonzalez.
WASHINGTON _ Despite a well-publicized spate of school shootings, the number of students expelled for bringing a gun to a public school dropped nationally in the 1997-98 school year, the U.S.
Education Department reported Tuesday.
Expulsions for gun possession dropped by as much as 31 percent, although inaccurate or incomplete data submitted by some states made precision impossible.
As many as 5,700 students in 1996-97 and roughly 3,900 in 1997-98 were expelled for bringing a firearm to school.
In the most recent gun-related expulsions, 61 percent involved a handgun, 7 percent a rifle or shotgun, and the remaining 32 percent another type of firearm or explosives.
``The sharp decline in the number of students bringing guns to school tells us that we are starting to move in the right direction,'' said Education Secretary Richard Riley.
The federal Gun Free Schools Act requires states that want federal aid for their schools to adopt and enforce laws that require an automatic one-year expulsion of a student who brings a gun to school.
The report showed that about 57 percent of the expelled children received no alternative education during their expulsion, a policy that the Clinton administration has proposed to outlaw.
The report also showed that the one-year expulsion was shortened on a case-by-case basis for 44 percent of those expelled.
About one-third of those whose expulsions were shortened had learning, emotional or physical disabilities.
Law enforcement officials agree that the decline in expulsions was due to fewer violations, rather than laxer enforcement by schools, according to Deputy Attorney General Eric Holder.
He said the drop was consistent with reports by the Department of Justice of a decline in gun-related violent crimes for all ages in all locations, and by the Centers for Disease Control of a decline in ``violence-related behavior'' by young people.
Holder said the trend was boosted by consistent enforcement of strict rules and by tighter gun control laws.
Another reason, according to school-district security officials who joined Riley for the announcement, is that more children think they might be caught.
The officials said adults and students alike are more likely to report gun-toting students than they were before the mass shootings in Pearl, Miss.
West Paducah, Ky.
Jonesboro, Ark.
Edinboro, Pa.
, and Springfield, Ore.
, and this year in Littleton, Colo.
, and Conyers, Ga.
``The community, they're our eyes and ears, and we can rely on them,'' said Lt.
Karen Hall of the Atlanta public schools.
``They'll report anything from a burglary in progress to students being disruptive or being where they're not supposed to be''.
(Story can end here.
Optional add follows).
Schools remain the safest place for children, with fewer than one out of 100 murders of children taking place in or around schools.
But many educators either share or feel they must respond to public concerns that crescendoed after a teacher and 14 students died at Columbine High School in Littleton.
``There are a still a lot of school districts that don't know what they are doing,'' acknowledged Jack Martin, chief of police for the Indianapolis public schools.
But this summer, even small districts that felt most distant from urban violence have been trying to find out which ``best practices'' are affordable, he said.
Schools are trying everything from hand-held metal detectors and closed-circuit TV cameras to policies that require transparent bookbags or forbid clothing baggy enough to conceal weapons, the security chiefs said.
Efforts by parents, communities and law enforcement to identify and assist ``red-flag children'' before they commit dangerous acts will do far more to make other children safe, said Edward Ray, director of security for the Denver public schools.
``I don't think anyone wants to see our schools transformed into institutions with concrete walls surrounded by concertina wire,'' Ray said.
ENDIT Story Filed By Cox Newspapers For Use By Clients of the New York Times News Service
GREENSBORO, N.C.
(AP) --New software that helps highlight school trouble spots may help educators trying to avert violent episodes such as the Columbine High School shootings earlier this year.
GBA Systems' School Safety Software, formally called SSP2000, is designed to give school administrators an accurate way to track incidents of school violence and other crimes.
``Schools need to know what is occurring on the campus,'' president Sylvia Stone said in an interview last month at the company's Greensboro headquarters.
``And they need to have information available to them quickly''.
Once the appropriate data is entered, the program helps users identify potential problems and repeat offenders.
It tracks incidents by category, including offender, victim, weapons and location.
The analysis capability is similar to that in several existing business and financial programs --not surprising since GBA Systems' main focus is selling accounting and other business applications.
Bob Bateman, school safety administrator for the Guilford County school district, used the software when a Greensboro middle school principal asked him to help identify places in the school where crime was a problem.
The principal thought the biggest problems were in the gym and cafeteria.
But after using the GBA software, Bateman found the hot spots were in the hallways.
``The principal used the information to justify shifting more resources to those areas, knowing that his decision was based on valid statistics instead of a hunch, or a quick reaction to one or two incidents,'' Bateman said.
While school safety measures such as metal detectors or additional security officers can be expensive, Stone estimated the cost of the software to be less than $2 per student.
So far, nearly 300 schools from North Carolina to California are using the software as part of their security programs, according to GBA Systems.
And others, including the New York City school district, are considering it as a means to get a handle on the problem of school violence.
School violence experts say more accurate and timely reporting of campus crime would help administrators get a better understanding of the problems they face and allow for early intervention.
``This is something we have encouraged for several years,'' said June Arnette, associate director of the National School Safety Center in Westlake Village, Calif.
``You cannot deploy resource officers to a particular school until you can see the problems''.
Peter Blauvelt, president of the National Alliance for Safe Schools in Berkley Springs, W.
Va., also saw merit in the software's ability to spot potential problems.
A report issued by the National Association of School Psychologists before Columbine concluded there was a common warning sign in five separate school shooting incidents.
Students who were isolated or withdrawn were prone to being picked on by other students, he said.
``This bullying was a common factor in all five cases and also at Columbine,'' he said.
``It should not be used as the basis for expulsion, but it can be used in determining if someone needs additional help''.
Blauvelt said schools need to be careful however about possibly violating a student's rights.
``There's a fine line,'' he said.
``Just because someone is withdrawn does not mean they are violent, but the student needs help to become reattached with the school community''.
GBA Systems' Ms.
Stone is quick to point out the software is not a panacea.
``If we can provide a tool --and quite a simple tool -- to help schools make better informed decisions, then our goal is accomplished,'' she said.
FORT GIBSON, Okla.
(AP) --The teen-ager standing on stage in short sleeves and jeans looked like he had nothing to hide -- until he pulled a knife from his pocket.
And then came a machete.
And another.
He drew a handgun from a front pocket, and three more from his waistband.
He reached down his baggy pants leg and up came a rifle.
By the time Chris Dorn's pockets were empty, an arsenal lay before the high school sophomore.
And the audience of school, police and emergency officials had a better idea of what they face in their efforts to keeping schools safe.
``He can double the number of weapons just with a jacket on,'' Michael Dorn, school safety specialist and Chris' father, said Tuesday during the school security workshop sponsored by the Oklahoma Schools Advisory Council.
More than 200 people came to learn about school safety in the town where in December, a 13-year-old boy shot four students outside Fort Gibson Middle School.
It was the country's third school shooting of the year.
In May, a 15-year-old boy in Conyers, Ga.
, wounded six students.
And in April, two students at Columbine High School in Littleton, Colo.
, shot 12 students and a teacher to death, before killing themselves.
A national study found more than 100,000 students carry a gun to school each day, but only 4,000 student gun expulsions were reported to the U.S.
Department of Education last year, Dorn said.
While schools cannot ensure safety, they can enact strategies that make schools safer, he said.
Dorn, who works for the Georgia Emergency Management Agency, said enforcing dress codes and reducing ``triggering behaviors'' such as fights and bullying can help make a difference.
Schools also have used random locker inspections and surprise classroom searches to foil potential acts of violence, he said.
He also discussed creating emergency plans for schools that would include everyone, from the local police to the school bus drivers.
Fort Gibson already had a crisis plan when the December attack took place.
The district has since started using a metal detector at special events, added security cameras and limited building access, Superintendent Steve Wilmoth said.
``Just being mentally prepared can help,'' Wilmoth said.
WASHINGTON _ As schools reopen for the new academic year, U.S.
Education Secretary Richard Riley offered this reassurance Tuesday: Parents and students should not fear repeats of deadly gun rampages such as the one last April in Littleton, Colo.
Riley said school efforts to counter violence are paying off and students are getting the message that guns have no place in school.
He cited a new Education Department report showing that a total of 3,390 students were expelled for bringing firearms to school during the 1997-1998 school year, the most recent year available.
The number was 31 percent lower than the previous school year, when 5,724 students were expelled.
The ``sharp decline...
tells us that we are starting to move in the right direction,'' Riley said.
``All of us _ parents, educators, students and all citizens _ can look to this new school year with hope, not with fear''.
Bill Modzeleski, director of the department's safe and drug-free schools program, said statistics for the 1998-1999 school year just completed are not yet available because of a lag time in reporting from local school districts and state education agencies.
Less than one percent of all homicides among school-age children occur in or around schools, Riley said.
Nevertheless, surveys have shown a level of anxiety among parents and students over school violence.
One such survey of high-school age students released Tuesday by the Horatio Alger Association showed 37 percent feel safe in school, down from 44 percent last year.
But local school security officials meeting with Riley said they believed schools generally are safe places, and that incidents such as the one at Columbine High School are ``an aberration,'' as Wesley Mitchell, police chief of the Los Angeles Unified School District, put it.
In that incident last April, two students stormed into Columbine and killed a dozen classmates and a teacher before committing suicide.
Other similar incidents have occurred in Pearl, Miss.
, West Paducah, Ky.
, Jonesboro, Ark.
, Edinboro, Pa.
, and Springfield, Ore.
The officials said that while educators and law enforcement officials have taken measures to pinpoint potential troublemakers and prevent violence from occurring, guarding against a future random attack is extremely difficult.
``At the point of attack, very few of the measures we could have, or do have, in place probably would have prevented the Columbine incident,'' said Edward Ray, director of security for Denver public schools.
``How do we identify those young people ...
`red flag' students that seem to be heading in (a violent) direction.
It's a very complex issue.
It's not something that can be readily identified at the school level''.
Ray said that incidents such as Columbine are ``beyond predictability,'' adding: ``Our number one goal is to make our schools as safe as we possibly can without turning them into bunkers.
I don't think any of us in this country want to see our schools become institutions surrounded by concrete walls and concertina wire''.
The education department report released Tuesday showed: _ The majority of those expelled in the 1997-98 school year _ 62 percent _ were expelled for handguns.
_ Seven percent were for possession of rifles or shotguns.
_ The remaining 31 percent were for other types of weapons such as bombs or grenades.
_ Fifty-seven percent of those expelled were high school students, while 33 percent were in junior high school and 10 percent in elementary school.
Not surprisingly, larger states reported higher numbers of expulsions.
California, with a school-age population of 6.2 million, had 382 expulsions.
New York, with 3.2 million school-age children, had 91 expulsions.
Texas, with 3.9 million children, expelled 424 _ the highest state total.
The expulsions are the result of the 1994 Gun-Free Schools Act, which conditioned federal education dollars on states passing laws that require local school districts to expel.
All states have adopted such laws.
Over the next few months, Riley said, the Education Department will release $135 million in grants to help schools and communities prevent violence through drug and alcohol counseling, and programs to help young people find ways of resolving problems without weapons.
Bruce Marquis, chief of police at the Houston Independent School District, said authorities have gotten smarter about making it harder for youths to carry guns in school.
Among the anti-gun measures are controls on backpacks and a dress code that makes it difficult for students to hide guns in clothing.
``Primarily, however, information (on students with guns) comes from other students,'' Marquis said.
``These are all signs ...
So when we say the numbers are down, we have good indicators''.
&QL; (STORY CAN END HERE --OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS).
&QL; Riley spoke at a press conference here just hours before a gunman opened fire in a Jewish Community Center in Los Angeles, wounding five persons including three children.
While that incident did not conform to the pattern of students taking out their frustrations with guns aimed at fellow students, it raised new concerns about levels of random violence and the ability of authorities to guard against unpredictable outbreaks.
Riley referred to the particularly gruesome round of blood-letting in Atlanta last month in which securities day-trader Mark O.
Barton killed 12 people including his wife and two children before committing suicide.
The Atlanta episode and the wave of school shootings serve to remind ``once again that this country really has created a culture of violence with this easy access to guns,'' Riley said.
``Americans really need to stop and think hard about what's happening''.
&UR; &LR; &QL; (Dan Freedman can be reached at 202-298-6920 and, by e-mail, at dan(at)hearstdc.com)
EDISON, N.J.
(AP) --Lawrence Middle School has a bullying policy.
Hunterdon Central Regional High School students walk around with identification badges.
And in Hamilton Square, guidance counselors are ordered to tell administrators when a student talks of wanting to hurt someone.
School administrators sharing their tactics for averting school violence at a second annual conference Wednesday unveiled elaborate safety plans and said they preferred to err on the side of caution when dealing with threats of violence.
''You can never be too safe,'' said Linda Batz, the principal of Hunterdon Central Regional.
Since two teen-agers at Columbine High School killed twelve other students, a teacher and themselves in Littleton, Colo.
, on April 20, 1999, some critics have said that schools have taken zero-tolerance discipline policies to the extreme.
Sayreville school officials said they would review the district's zero-tolerance policy after complaints about the three-day suspension of four kindergartners who were pointing their fingers at each other while playing ''cops and robbers'' in the playground.
Six elementary school students in Plainfield were suspended for two days in March after an 11-year-old boy threatened to ''get a gun'' if other children did not stop teasing him.
Joe Duca, a retired police officer who works as a security coordinator for the South Brunswick Schools, said school officials are fearful of not doing enough to stop another Columbine.
''I think everybody is running scared,'' Duca said.
''They're afraid of being held responsible'' if a school threat escalates into violence.
Ellen Boylan, an attorney at the Education Law Center who handles students-rights cases, said zero-tolerance policies illegally keep students from receiving educations and don't result in safer schools.
She cited research that concluded harsh punishment for intolerable behavior does nothing to stop the behavior or increase school safety.
Ninety-five percent of school districts in the nation have such policies, she said, and yet suspensions and expulsions have doubled between 1990 and 1997, indicating that students are not deterred.
''In the mind of students, it's overcontrol,'' she said, adding that it may lead to more violence.
Chris Woolley, the principal of Lawrence Middle School in Lawrence Township, said that his school might meet with a parent or a school psychologist about a student threat before deciding upon a suspension.
He might not suspend a student for threatening to shoot a rubber band at someone, for example, but may suspend the student if the spitball seriously injures another person.
''It is incumbent on us all to make reasonable decisions,'' he said.
Jane Hammond, the Jefferson County (Colo).
superintendent whose district includes Columbine, said one of the most important lessons she learned from the tragedy was that student safety isn't a sure thing.
''I have learned to accept that I cannot guarantee the safety of all of our children,'' Hammond said in a keynote address.
''I cannot even guarantee my own safety for the rest of this day''.
''I feel stress every day we have school,'' she continued.
Schools have taken different approaches to the problem.
Lawrence Township's bullying policy bans students from intimidation, use of force or ''habitual or persistent cruelty''.
The school has made efforts to reach out to alienated students, Woolley said.
''Students must feel that people care about them and that they have a voice,'' he said.
Hunterdon Central Regional High School has practiced evacuation drills.
The school requires student identification badges and equips administrators with two-way radios and bullhorns.
The high school recently sent a police officer dressed in a fright wig and carrying a gun case to test the school's response to an intruder.
Some students directed the officer to principal Batz' office when he asked, but Batz said in a second drill the ''intruder'' was reported in two minutes.
Hamilton Square guidance counselors are told to report any threat a student makes in a counseling session to school administrators, said Superintendent Neil A. Bencivenga.
WASHINGTON _ Six years ago, a trench-coated classmate with a deer rifle and two handguns opened fire in Natalie Hintz's middle-school math class in Moses Lake, Wash.
Hintz was wounded, and two other students and the teacher were killed.
But last year's similar shootings in Littleton, Colo.
, that left 15 people dead led to few improvements in security at her high school, according to Hintz, now an 18-year-old senior.
Her school system's low-key response to the shootings at Littleton's Columbine High School on April 20 reflects a national pattern, according to students, school officials, researchers and safety advocates interviewed in the past two weeks.
``I think new policies were made, but they're not being vigorously enforced,'' Hintz said.
A police officer is stationed in her school and most entrances are locked during the school day, so that outsiders would have to use the main doors.
``But when kids bang on the door, anyone walks over to let them in, or like prop the door open,'' she said.
``On paper, we also have a really strict policy that you're not supposed to walk down a hallway without a pass,'' Hintz said.
``That's not enforced at all''.
In one sign that a new emphasis on reporting suspicious activity can pay off, a girl at her school notified the principal in January that a boy told her he had a hit list.
The boy was expelled, but Hintz and other survivors of the 1994 shootings didn't learn about that until a story appeared in the local newspaper.
While school systems located close to Littleton reacted strongly, most of those who experienced the event only through TV retreated from a sharp first reaction, gradually returning to previous practices.
``It had effects, but they dwindled down among those who weren't directly concerned,'' said Sgt.
James Stewart of the Atlanta police department, who supervises officers assigned to the city's schools.
``We were far more concerned a few years ago when we had to arrange to assess and get some psychological attention for some kids from the Atlanta schools who were in a local mall when some guy came through and shot it up''.
``In the week right after Columbine, the call volume to us increased tremendously,'' said Jim Jones, vice president of Security Voice, Inc.
His firm in Columbus, Ohio, accepts anonymous tips on a toll-free ``Safe School Helpline'' it operates for 4,000 of the nation's 15,000 school districts.
But he said the tips this year have been back at their usual level, as low as one per district per week.
``I don't see evidence that much has changed,'' said Lawrence Sherman, director of the Fels(cq) Center of Government at the University of Pennsylvania.
``This is a country in which most gun violence is concentrated in the inner cities, where it isn't newsworthy, and it looks like the window of opportunity (that news coverage of Littleton provided) for improving national gun control policy may have closed''.
In Washington, after a flurry of meetings at which experts and victims offered suggestions, President Clinton and the bipartisan House leadership separately appointed working groups on school violence.
Both groups issued long lists of virtually identical suggestions for new ways _ other than gun control _ that students, parents, schools and communities can work together to detect, prevent or cope with school violence.
But none of the suggestions that require new federal laws have been adopted, because each side believes that this might weaken its leverage in the election-year negotiations over controversial new regulations for guns.
``Maybe next year, we'll have more luck,'' said Rep.
Martin Frost of Texas, Democratic co-chair of the House task force.
``Or some people may try to add one or two of our recommendations as amendments to appropriations bills moving through Congress this year''.
The Republican co-chair, Rep.
Jennifer Dunn of Washington, said, ``I suspect we might be able to get some put into the Juvenile Justice bill.
After that, maybe there could be a second phase for the task force, where we would make specific recommendations to appropriations committees and then follow through on that over the next few years''.
The Education and Justice departments have given away more than 500,000 copies of ``Early Warning, Timely Response,'' a guide prepared by experts in 1998.
Most copies have been distributed since the Littleton shootings.
The guide tells school officials, parents and citizens how to prepare an action plan for detecting, preventing and responding to threats and crises in the schools.
``I think a lot of people are looking at it,'' said Kevin Dwyer, president of the National Association of School Psychologists, a co-author of the guide.
``Unfortunately, there is no record-keeping of the effect, so we have no idea how many schools and communities sat down, put some plans together and implemented them,'' Dwyer said.
He also helped prepare ``Action Guide for Safe Schools,'' a follow-up booklet that Education Secretary Richard Riley and Attorney General Janet Reno are issuing this month.
Solid information on how schools reacted to Littleton should emerge from a school survey on crime and safety that was mailed to a sample of 3,000 school principals last month, said the survey's director, Kathryn Chandler of the Education Department.
However, when the results are released in December, Ken Trump, a Cleveland-based school security consultant, will view them skeptically.
``Based on my 15 years of working with school officials on school safety, I know for a fact that crimes are grossly underreported by school officials,'' Trump told reporters.
Even without hard data, some school security experts and students said that since the Littleton shootings, they have observed several useful trends on the local level.
Schools have phased in innovations that range from more visible security procedures and creation of more local chapters of SAVE (Students Against Violence Everywhere) to a more efficient use of school psychologists and counselors.
The beefed-up security procedures include surveillance cameras, metal detectors, see-through bookbags, id cards for all students and teachers, and crisis-reaction drills.
(Story can end here.
Optional adds follow) ``A drill for a bomb threat is just like a fire drill, only it takes longer,'' said Kelly Boyd, a high school junior in Montgomery County, Md.
``But if someone fires a gun in school, I don't think most people are going to remember which exit they are supposed to use''.
Higher federal subsidies have increased the number of police working for or assigned to schools.
``Right now, we've got the resources made available to us that let us do the positive, proactive programs.
That includes providing kids with more positive inter-action with adults through after-school programs that are a combination of tutorial and recreational programs,'' said Jim Kelly, police chief of the school district of Palm Beach County, Fla.
``My only concern as crime statistics go down is that, as more people realize that school are the safest place for your child to be, the government powers that be might decide they've solved that problem and turn to another one,'' Kelly said.
The number of school psychologists and counselors may have increased slightly, according to their national associations.
Jan Gallagher of San Antonio, president of the American School Counselors Association, said, ``More importantly, I have counselors telling me they are getting to do more of the mental health work that they are trained to do, rather than to be used primarily as test administrators and clerical workers''.
``Unfortunately, I don't hear that at all,'' said Scott Poland of Cypress, Texas, author of ``Coping with Crisis'' and a school psychologist who has been part of teams dealing with multiple shootings in several states.
``There are still too many cases where kids know there is a gun on campus, or that a student shows signs of being homicidal or suicidal, but the kids won't come forward and tell an adult''.
For more information: Federal list of Web sites on school safety and violence prevention _ http://ericir.syr.edu/Qa/hottopics/safety.html Bipartisan Working Group on Youth Violence _ http://www.house.gov/dunn/workinggroup.htm Million Mom March (anti-gun) _ http://www.millionmommarch.com/mission.html Women Against Gun Control (anti-march) _ http://www.wagc.com Andrew Mollison's e-mail address is andym(at)coxnews.com ENDIT Story Filed By Cox Newspapers For Use By Clients of the New York Times News Service
ATLANTA _ It's a shocking statistic: Six thousand students were caught bringing guns to U.S. schools during the past two years, but a mere 13 cases were prosecuted under a federal law the Clinton administration promoted to keep guns away from schools.
In response to the call for additional gun control after a wave of school shootings, the purported gap between arrests and prosecutions has been cited and recited by political figures and others who say existing laws should be better enforced before new gun restrictions are imposed.
It will be a central theme of a House hearing Thursday into new gun-control proposals.
There's just one problem: While plenty shocking, this statistic isn't entirely accurate.
It is true that about 6,000 students were cited in 1997 and 1998 under the federal Gun-Free Schools Act for bringing firearms to school.
But, as the law requires, those students were suspended from school and charged as juvenile delinquents in state and local courts.
And it is true that the U.S.
Justice Department prosecuted just 13 people the past two years under the federal Gun-Free School Zone Act, a separate law that prohibits the possession of firearms within 1,000 feet of a school.
But thousands of other defendants who allegedly violated the federal law, including the 15-year-old accused of shooting six classmates at Heritage High School in Rockdale County, Ga.
, have been charged or prosecuted under state laws.
Federal prosecutions, authorities say, are reserved for particularly flagrant cases.
The 13 prosecutions have nothing to do with the 6,000 instances of children bringing guns to school, said U.S.
Justice Department and White House officials, who complained that gun-control opponents have drawn a misleading, if salient, link between the two numbers to divert attention from the emotional issues of school violence and firearms restrictions.
``If you look at any number in a vacuum, you can find a problem with it,'' said Brian Steel, a spokesman for the Justice Department.
``This is a total smokescreen''.
In 1997, the latest year for which statistics are available, the federal government prosecuted 6,078 gun offenses, the Justice Department said.
State and local prosecutors handled the rest of the year's 218,900 arrests in which a weapons offense was the most serious charge.
With political opponents citing such figures, the Clinton administration's enforcement of existing gun laws is becoming a focal point in the debate over new regulations.
In a speech to the Georgia Republican Party last Saturday, Wayne LaPierre, the National Rifle Association's executive vice president, deplored ``a collapse of federal firearms law enforcement''.
At the same meeting, in Augusta, GOP presidential contender Steve Forbes ridiculed the administration's record on firearms violations at schools.
``In 1997,'' he said, ``they prosecuted a total of five.
Last year, they prosecuted eight.
And you can hear the White House spin now: From five to eight, that's a 60 percent increase''.
The House Judiciary Committee is ready to consider a bill supported by the president, similar to one the Senate passed last week, that would mandate background checks on people who buy weapons at gun shows and would require trigger locks on all firearms.
But at a hearing on Thursday, the House panel first will ask why Clinton's Justice Department isn't prosecuting more cases.
``We've taken it upon ourselves to federalize a lot of crimes, and it's the Department of Justice's responsibility to see to it that those laws are executed and followed,'' said Michael Connolly, a spokesman for Judiciary Chairman Henry Hyde (R-Ill.).
``What's the point of passing new laws?
.. . We want to look at how and why these (new proposals) would be prosecuted differently than the current record the administration has put together''.
U.S. Rep.
Bob Barr (R-Ga.), a Judiciary member, described the low prosecution figures as ``a major problem for the administration''.
``All this president is interested in is a sound bite, a photo op with a bunch of cardboard cops behind him to show that he's tough on crime,'' Barr said.
``They are more interested in limiting access to firearms by citizens than they are in tackling the misuse of firearms by criminals''.
But a White House spokeswoman said focusing on how many cases are prosecuted is irrelevant.
More important, said Julie Goldberg, a deputy press secretary, is the fact that the number of reported violent crimes involving firearms decreased by 29 percent from 1993 to 1997.
``Enforcement alone is not enough,'' Goldberg said.
``There are other issues that Congress also needs to look at.
That's what the president is hoping to have Congress act on _ his proposals to prevent crimes and prevent guns from getting into the hands of children''.
Alan Judd writes for the Atlanta Journal-Constitution, Atlanta, Ga.
Story Filed By Cox Newspapers For Use By Clients of the New York Times News Service
